@) Taylor & Francis
Taylor Francs Group

Postgraduate Medicine

The Raped Powr-Reviewed
joursal Fur Plrysicians

 

ISSN: 0032-5481 (Print) 1941-9260 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ipgm20

 

An Update on Acute and Chronic Urticaria for the
Primary Care Provider

Umer Najib MD & Javed Sheikh MD

To cite this article: Umer Najib MD & Javed Sheikh MD (2009) An Update on Acute and Chronic
Urticaria for the Primary Care Provider, Postgraduate Medicine, 121:1, 141-151

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.3810/pgm.2009.01.1966

 

a Published online: 13 Mar 2015.

 

 

NJ
(gy Submit your article to this journal @

 

LS
ey View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=ipgm20

Download by: [Deakin University Library] Date: 05 November 2015, At: 18:37

 
Downloaded by [Deakin University Library] at 18:37 05 November 2015

Global reprints distributed only by Postgraduate Medicine USA. No part of Postgraduate Medicine may be reproduced or transmitted

in any form without written permission from the publisher. All permission requests to reproduce or adapt published material must be

directed to the journal office in Berwyn, PA. Only Copyright Clearance Center and no other persons or offices are authorized to act on

our behalf. Requests should include a statement describing how material will be used, the complete article citation, a copy of the figure

or table of interest as it appeared in the journal, and a copy of the “new” (adapted) material if appropriate CLINICAL FEATURES

An Update on Acute and Chronic Urticaria
for the Primary Care Provider

 

Umer Najib, MD! Abstract: Urticaria is a common dermatologic condition seen by primary care physicians.

Javed Sheikh, MD | Urticaria can result in significant morbidity and a dramatic decline in quality of life. Acute urtiaoa . caria is mostly an allergic or IgE-mediated reaction and tends to be self-limited, while chronic

‘Division of Allergy and Inflammation,

Department of Medicine, Beth Israel urticaria generally does not exhibit any specific external cause and is therefore considered idio
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard pathic. Evidence suggests that up to 30% to 50% of idiopathic cases may be autoimmune and/or

Medical School, Bi MA F i 4 : a
Sei Eah SEO O'R OOStOn related to mast cell/basophil abnormalities. There is further evidence of an autoantibody to the

high-affinity receptor for IgE (FceRI), specifically binding to the o-chain (FceRIa), which may
be pathogenic. The treatment regimen for urticaria needs to be individualized as the severity and
clinical pattern can vary considerably between patients. Histamine antagonists are the mainstays
of therapy. For more severe or persistent cases, there are few Food and Drug Administration
(FDA)-approved options, and there are limited data from controlled trials. Further research is

 

required to develop safe and more effective agents for this disease.

Keywords: urticaria; autoimmune; basophil; mast cell; FceRI autoantibodies; hives; antihistamines

 

Introduction

Urticaria is a common dermatologic condition seen by primary care physicians. Most
cases of urticaria are of short duration, but when urticaria becomes chronic, it can be
a very frustrating condition for the patient and physician. The disability and distress
caused by urticaria can lead to serious quality of life impairment. One study found
that the level of quality of life impairment experienced by patients with chronic urticaria (CU) can be comparable to that experienced by patients with cardiovascular
disease.!

Urticaria, or hives, is classified as either acute or chronic. Recurrent urticaria lasting < 6 weeks is considered acute, whereas it is considered chronic when symptoms
have been continuously or intermittently present for > 6 weeks.’ Urticaria occurs in
15% to 25% of the population at some point in their lives and is most often acute.’
Only 30% of these cases go on to become chronic.’ The average duration of CU is 3
to 5 years. However, there is considerable variation in duration and some patients

 

Correspondence: Javed Sheikh, MD,

Clinical Director, Division of Allergy can continue to experience symptoms for = 20 years.* When no underlying cause is
and Inflammation, Clinical Director, found, CU has been referred to as chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU), which comprises
Center for Eosinophilic Disorders, " " « ‘ 4 . 0) . 2
Beth Israel Deaconess’ Medical Center, 80% to 90% of patients with CU.* Evidence shows that 30% to 50% of patients with
Assistant Professor of Medicine, CIU demonstrate evidence of autoimmunity, while the remaining 50% to 70% do
Harvard Medical School, : 4 coed: : so 6

One Brookliie Place, Suite 623, not have autoimmune features.* Chronic idiopathic urticaria affects up to 3% of the
Brookline, MA 02445. population, and up to 20% of these patients can have symptoms > 10 years.* Urticaria
Tel: 617-278-8100 : cd 5 5

Fax: 617-278-8101 affects both genders and all races. Acute urticaria is more common in children and
E-mail: jsheikh@bidmc.harvard.edu young adults while CU is more common in adults. Chronic idiopathic urticaria has a

female to male ratio of 4:1 and is most prevalent in middle-aged adults.*

 

© Postgraduate Medicine, Volume 121, Issue |, January 2009, ISSN — 0032-5481, e-ISSN — 1941-9260 14) O86
Downloaded by [Deakin University Library] at 18:37 05 November 2015

INDIVIDUAL USE ONLY, NOT TO BE DISTRIBUTED OR PRINTED FOR DISTRIBUTION. © JTE MULTIMEDIA, LLC

Umer Najib and Javed Sheikh

 

Approximately 50% of patients with urticaria present with
associated angioedema, which is a condition that involves
swelling of the deep dermal and subcutaneous/submucosal
tissues.* About 40% of patients present only with urticaria,
while 10% have isolated angioedema.*

Clinical Presentation
Urticaria usually presents as edematous pink or red wheals
of variable size and shape, with surrounding erythema. The
lesions, which are often described as welts or hives, are
generally pruritic.5 A painful or burning sensation may be
described in some cases.° Such lesions are often associated
with angioedema or vasculitis.°

Angioedema appears as brawny, non-pitting edema
typically without well-defined margins and without
erythema.’ It is usually not distributed in the dependent parts
of the body (in contrast to most other types of edema) and
may involve the lips, tongue, eyelids, and genitalia.’

Dermographism is often observed in conjunction with
CU. With dermographism, wheals can be created or “written”
on the skin by stroking or scratching the skin.* A linear

 

response occurs on the skin after stroking because of reflex
vasodilation. An exaggerated response, accompanied by
itching, leads to the development of erythema and hives.*
Dermographism is considered a common physical trigger
for urticaria and accompanies CIU in approximately 50%
of cases.* The presence of dermographism might aid
the clinician in making the diagnosis of CIU, helping to
distinguish CIU from masquerading conditions.

Patients with CU also may report pressure-induced hives,
which can occur with elastic or tight clothing. Cholinergic
urticaria presents as diffuse erythema and elevated, pale
monomorphic urticarial lesions that have a pinpoint appearance.’ In addition, patients with cholinergic urticaria can
have more generalized cholinergic manifestations, such as
wheezing, salivation, syncope, or lacrimation, but this is
unusual.’

Individual urticarial lesions usually fade within 24 hours,
but new lesions may be developing continuously.* With
delayed pressure urticaria, lesions may last as long as
48 hours. In contrast, the lesions of urticarial vasculitis may
last for several days or more.'° Therefore, if lesions are found
to last > 48 hours, this would prompt consideration of a skin
biopsy to evaluate for possible urticarial vasculitis. Other
clinical features of urticarial vasculitis, which may or may
not be present, include palpable and non-blanching purpura
and residual hyperpigmented changes after lesions fade.

Pathophysiology
Urticaria manifests as skin lesions and pruritus caused
by an allergic or nonallergic mechanism. Mast cells and
basophils are the primary effector cells in urticaria."
Histamine, although not the only mediator, is thought to be
the most important biochemical mediator in urticaria." It is
known to cause the classic wheal-and-flare response that is
observed with urticaria and with positive results on allergy
skin tests. The classic allergic response that occurs with
allergen-triggered urticaria is characterized by release from
mast cells of histamine, leukotriene C4, and prostaglandin
D2." This activation of mast cells occurs when adjacent
immunoglobulin E (IgE) molecules, which are bound to
the surface of mast cells by the high-affinity receptors for
IgE (FceRI), are cross-linked by allergens. The release
of these mediators leads to quick onset of vasodilatation
and subcutaneous and intradermal leakage of plasma from
postcapillary venules, which in turn lead to pruritus. There can
also be a more delayed (4—8 hours) secretion of inflammatory
cytokines (tumor necrosis factor, interleukin [IL]-4, and IL-5)
that leads to an inflammatory infiltrate and longer lasting
lesions, somewhat analogous to the allergen-induced, latephase response that occurs in asthma. Histamine and other
mediators can be released by other nonallergic mechanisms
(ie, independent of allergen-induced activation of mast cells).
For example, neuropeptides are known to cause mast cell
degranulation by a nonallergic mechanism and may well be
involved in dermographism and in emotional exacerbation
of urticaria. This phenomenon does not require specific IgE
to any particular allergen. Basophils also possess the highaffinity IgE receptor and studies suggest that basophils may
have an altered histamine release and recruitment in at least
some patients with CU.'*

Acute urticaria is mostly an allergic or IgE-mediate
reaction and tends to be self-limited. Typically, acute urticaria
is a hypersensitivity reaction to foods, drugs, insect bites, or
contact with pets. The predominant foods that cause urticaria
are milk, eggs, peanuts, tree nuts (eg, walnuts, hazelnuts, and
almonds), finfish, and shellfish. Although uncommon, the
antioxidant food preservatives butylated hydroxyanisole an
butylated hydroxytoluene have also been shown to trigger
urticaria.'> Inflammatory processes produced by viral illness,
particularly in children, can also quite commonly cause acute

 

urticaria. Drugs most commonly implicated in drug-induced
urticaria include penicillins, sulfonamides, muscle relaxants
(used with anesthesia induction), diuretics, and nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).

 

142 © Postgraduate Medicine, Volume 121, Issue |, January 2009, ISSN — 0032-5481, e-ISSN — 1941-9260
Downloaded by [Deakin University Library] at 18:37 05 November 2015

INDIVIDUAL USE ONLY, NOT TO BE DISTRIBUTED OR PRINTED FOR DISTRIBUTION. © JTE MULTIMEDIA, LLC

Chronic Urticaria for the PCP

 

It is important to note that many cases of drug-induced
urticaria and other forms of urticaria can occur by an
IgE-independent (nonallergic) mechanism. For instance,
some drugs (eg, opioids, NSAIDs), radiocontrast dye, viral
infections (eg, hepatitis B and C, Epstein-Barr, and herpes) or
ingestion of fish contaminated by histamine-producing bacteria
(eg, scombroid food poisoning) can produce urticaria by an
IgE-independent mechanism. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs have been reported to induce urticaria by either IgEmediated or IgE-independent mechanisms. True IgE-mediated
allergy to an NSAID is rare and is usually specific to a single
agent, and other NSAIDs may be well tolerated by the patient.
In contrast, IgE-independent NSAID-triggered urticaria is
fairly common. It is thought to occur due to manipulation
of the kinin-prostaglandin pathways by NSAIDs. In such
patients, all typical NSAIDs would be expected to trigger
urticaria. Selective cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors
generally do not induce urticaria in patients who are sensitive
to NSAIDs, although there can be exceptions.'°

Although a lymphocytic infiltrate is commonly found in
the lesions of both acute and chronic types of urticaria, some
CU lesions have a mixed cellular infiltrate, ie, a mixture
of lymphocytes, polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs),
and other inflammatory cells.!’ A minority of patients with
particularly severe or atypical CU are found to have urticarial
vasculitis on skin biopsy, with lesions characterized by
vascular destruction, fibrinoid necrosis, and immune complex
deposition.'°

Autoantibodies Found in Chronic
Urticaria

Evidence suggests that 30% to 50% of patients with CU have
autoantibodies to the o-chain of the high affinity receptor for
IgE (FeeRIq)."” It is hypothesized that these autoantibodies
are present in the circulation of these patients and lead to the
activation of infiltrating basophils or skin mast cells, thereby
causing hives. Conclusive evidence of this mechanism is still
lacking. In other words, these autoantibodies are thought to
“short-circuit” the IgE-mast cell system, activating IgE without any need for allergen-specific IgE to be bound to the IgE.
Therefore, a good proportion of chronic idiopathic urticaria is
now thought to be an intrinsic autoimmune condition rather
than an allergy. Further evidence supporting an autoimmune
basis for urticaria in some patients is a close association with
thyroid autoimmunity.'* Despite the apparent presence of
2 different CIU subgroups (based on the presence or absence
of specific autoantibodies), studies have noted only a few
differences in clinical presentation,” histology,””! or response

to therapy between patients of the 2 subgroups, and have found
that skin biopsy specimens of wheals from CU patients show
a similar pattern of infiltration with eosinophils, neutrophils,
basophils, and lymphocytes regardless of whether the CU is
associated with autoantibody presence or not.?°?!

A diagnostic test called the autologous serum skin test
(ASST), which is now often used by allergists and some
dermatologists, was developed as a result of 2 decades
of investigations in which the investigators were able to
demonstrate that intradermal injection of autologous serum
caused an immediate wheal-and-flare response in some
patients with CU,” and that this process seemed to occur only
during disease activity but not remission.”* Further evidence
demonstrated that many of these patients appeared to have
circulating serum histamine-releasing factors, meaning that
the serum from these patients was able to cause histamine
release in an in vitro laboratory model of basophil or mast cell
activation.”>"° This in-vitro histamine release also occurred
with purified IgG fractions of the serum in the majority of the
patients, suggesting that the histamine-releasing factor in most
cases was an IgG antibody.'** Investigations further demonstrated that the histamine-releasing IgG antibody appeared
to be an autoantibody to the o-chain of the high-affinity
IgE receptor (FceRIq) in the majority of such patients.'??7
However, in a small number of cases, the serum with
histamine-releasing activity has no evidence of autoantibody
to FeceRIo, and in these cases it is thought that the serum
contains autoantibodies to the IgE molecule itself.?”*

 

Studies have shown that there may be both false-positive
(due to formation of other vasoactive mediators while
processing the serum) and false-negative (due to degradation
of the histamine-releasing factor or autoantibody) results with
the ASST.” Similarly, several recent studies have noted that
serum samples from patients without CU can also induce
positive ASST results***! and in vitro histamine release from
donor basophils.*? The current gold standard for detecting
clinically relevant autoantibodies is a laboratory test referred
to as the functional in-vitro donor basophil histamine release
assay.***4 At the time of writing this article, there are 2 reference laboratories in the United States that commercially offer
such a test: IBT Reference Laboratory (with the test referred
to as the CU Index™) and Clinical Reference Laboratories
at National Jewish Medical and Research Center (with the
test referred to as the anti-FceRI antibody).***° However, the
exact clinical role of these tests has not yet been established
in the literature.

 

© Postgraduate Medicine, Volume 121, Issue I, January 2009, ISSN — 0032-5481, e-ISSN — 1941-9260 143
Downloaded by [Deakin University Library] at 18:37 05 November 2015

INDIVIDUAL USE ONLY, NOT TO BE DISTRIBUTED OR PRINTED FOR DISTRIBUTION. © JTE MULTIMEDIA, LLC

Umer Najib and Javed Sheikh

 

Nonautoimmune Subgroup of CU

Patients with CU who do not have autoantibodies to FeeRIo. or
IgE usually have no identifiable cause for their hives and comprise the remaining 50% to 70% of patients with CIU. There
is now increasing evidence that there may be abnormalities in
number, structure, or function of basophils or mast cells in at
least some of these patients, but there is much to be learned
about the pathophysiology in this subgroup.'* For example,
patients with CU have been found to have lower circulating
basophil counts and basophils that are hyporesponsive to
nonspecific stimulation through FceRI.”**’ It has also been
shown that patients with CU and histamine-releasing serum

Table |. Causes of Urticaria

Acute Urticaria

activity have lower basophil counts than CU patients without
releasing activity.** Future investigations in this area will help
to further explain the pathogenesis of urticaria in patients
without autoantibodies to FeeRIo or IgE.

External Causes of Urticaria

When urticaria is not idiopathic, other major causes, such as
food and drugs, should be considered (Table 1). As described
previously, food allergy, which is often a consideration in
acute urticaria—particularly in children—is rarely a factor
in CU. Drug sensitivities, which are commonly implicated
in acute urticaria, can be a cause of CU as well when the

 

Allergic reactions (may also rarely

— Foods (especially for children)

cause chronic urticaria) — Food additives/preservatives (rare)

— Drugs
— Insect bites

Nonallergic release of mediators (may
also rarely cause chronic urticaria)

Systemic illnesses/conditions

Chronic idiopathic

— Others (eg, venom, animal saliva, latex)

— Drugs
¢ Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
e Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors
© Opiates
¢ Succinylcholine
— Acute infections
—Venoms
— Radiocontrast media

Chronic Urticaria

— Viral
© eg, hepatitis B and C, Epstein-Barr, and herpes
— Parasitic
— Limited evidence
© Helicobacter pylori, sinusitis, cutaneous fungal, other occult infections

— Complement deficiencies
— Cryoglobulinemia
© eg, with hepatitis C, chronic lymphocytic leukemia
— Serum sickness
* or other immune complex-mediated processes
— Rheumatologic
© eg, systemic lupus, rheumatoid arthritis
— Thyroid disease
— Neoplasm
© eg, chronic lymphocytic leukemia
— Other endocrine
© eg, tumors, ovarian, oral contraceptives

— Heat, cold, pressure, vibratory, cholinergic, solar, aquagenic, dermographism,
exercise-induced urticaria/anaphylaxis

— 80%-90% of all chronic urticaria

— Excludes all of the above etiologies
— No known antigenic stimulus

— Up to 40%-60% may be autoimmune
— New data: mast cell/basophil defects

 

 

© Postgraduate Medicine, Volume 121, Issue |, January 2009, ISSN — 0032-5481, e-ISSN — 1941-9260
Downloaded by [Deakin University Library] at 18:37 05 November 2015

INDIVIDUAL USE ONLY, NOT TO BE DISTRIBUTED OR PRINTED FOR DISTRIBUTION. © JTE MULTIMEDIA, LLC

Chronic Urticaria for the PCP

 

drug is taken daily, so medication history is important.
Cholinergic urticaria occurs following exercise or exposure
to heat, when there is a rise in the basal body temperature.’
Cold urticaria and solar urticaria usually manifest after
exposure to a cold stimulus and sunlight, respectively. In
an event of massive total body exposure (eg, swimming,
in the case of cold urticaria), hypotension or death can
occur. Delayed pressure urticaria usually manifests 4 to
6 hours after prolonged pressure has been applied (eg, tight
clothing).*° As discussed previously, up to 90% of cases of
CU can be classified as idiopathic, but recent studies have
shown that 30% to 50% of these cases have an autoimmune
component.’”

Some investigators have shown an association between
CU and chronic infections, which include Helicobacter
pylori gastric infection, tinea pedis, cholecystitis, hepatitis,
sinus infections, and dental abscesses, but the evidence
is controversial. Additionally, a significant proportion of
patients with CU are found to have concomitant thyroid
autoimmunity.'* These patients have autoantibodies directed
against thyroid proteins but may be euthyroid. Some patients
with these thyroid autoantibodies also have autoantibodies
to FceRIa, but others do not.*! Some authors have found
that treating these euthyroid patients with thyroxine leads
to an improvement in urticaria,” but other authors have not
been able to reproduce this finding® and there are no large,
blinded, placebo-controlled trials of thyroxine for treatment
of urticaria.

Differential Diagnosis

The conditions that may be confused with urticaria include
flushing disorders, angioedema, erythema multiforme
(lesions last longer), bullous pemphigoid, dermatitis herpetiformis, papular urticaria (eg, insect bites), exercise-induced
anaphylaxis, exercise-induced/food-associated anaphylaxis,
mastocytosis/urticaria pigmentosa, urticarial vasculitis,
and pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy
(PUPPP), which is also referred to as polymorphic eruption of pregnancy (PEP).* Urticarial vasculitis, which can
be considered to be an extreme form of CU, can be seen
in conjunction with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE),
juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (JRA), hepatitis B or C, and
paraproteinemias.”"”

Angioedema presenting without urticaria is a unique
situation where the following diagnoses should be considered: angioedema due to hereditary C1-inhibitor deficiency,
angioedema due to acquired C1 -inhibitor deficiency, angioedema associated with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibi
tors, and primary vascular processes, such as the superior
vena cava syndrome.”

Evaluation

The evaluation of urticaria begins with a detailed history and
physical examination. For acute urticaria and CU, history
should include details of the hives in relation to foods,
medications (including herbals, supplements), infections,
occupational exposures, physical triggers, insect stings, and
contact exposures, as well as a complete review of systems.
For patients with CU, key elements include duration of the
episodes, duration of individual lesions, nature of the lesions,
and presence of angioedema. Some herbal products that have
been associated with urticaria include cranberry, echinacea,
hypericum, willow, garlic, glucosamine, ginger, horseradish,
phytoestrogen, royal jelly, propolis, and valerian.**“° At
times, topical use of herbal soap may cause urticaria.*” However, if the history does not raise suspicion of one of these
triggers based on timing of the onset of urticaria with the
start of a food or herbal product, it is rare to have an occult
food, herbal, or food additive trigger. Data suggest that such
an occult cause of CU is found in no more than 2% to 3%
of cases.‘ For these reasons, having the patients complete a
detailed and prolonged diary of foods or food additives, or
undergo complex elimination diets are rarely helpful.

The physical examination should exclude possible physical triggers if suggested by the history. A primary care physician can easily evaluate for the presence of dermatographism
by scratching the skin with the curved end ofa tongue blade,
and then observing for the development of a wheal-and-flare
reaction in the subsequent 5 to 10 minutes. More sophisticated physical challenge tests, which include challenge with
an ice cube, heat, pressure, light, exercise, and vibration, are
sometimes performed in the specialty setting if needed to
confirm physical urticaria.

Laboratory evaluation is usually not warranted in patients
with acute urticaria. Routine laboratory evaluation/screening
tests for CU is a controversial topic. Many specialists order
only a few select screening labs for patients who have CU with
no apparent etiology. Common screening lab tests that may
be ordered include complete blood count with differential (to
include evaluation of total eosinophil count) and erythrocyte
sedimentation rate. Less commonly, some specialists will routinely perform a basic metabolic panel and liver enzymes on
all patients with CU. Some experts advocate measurements of
antithyroid antibodies (antimicrosomal and antithyroglobulin
antibodies). Thyroid studies can be considered, particularly in
women, or in patients with a family history of thyroid disease

 

© Postgraduate Medicine, Volume 121, Issue I, January 2009, ISSN — 0032-5481, e-ISSN — 1941-9260 145
Downloaded by [Deakin University Library] at 18:37 05 November 2015

INDIVIDUAL USE ONLY, NOT TO BE DISTRIBUTED OR PRINTED FOR DISTRIBUTION. © JTE MULTIMEDIA, LLC

Umer Najib and Javed Sheikh

 

or other autoimmune diseases.* Evaluation of the complement system should be considered in patients with prominent
angioedema and in patients with urticarial lesions lasting > 24
hours. Most experts agree that further testing should be done
only based on specific positive findings from the history and
physical examination. If any specific disorder is suspected, a
targeted laboratory evaluation is warranted.

Allergists in specialty clinics may order allergy skin
tests if there is suspicion of food allergy, stinging insect
hypersensitivity, or severe allergy to pollen, cats, or latex
as a cause of urticaria. This may come up in the evaluation
of acute urticaria, but rarely is a concern with CU unless
the history is suspicious. Skin testing can be done to help
establish hypersensitivity to a limited number of antibiotics as well. Patients with cold urticaria warrant evaluation
for cold agglutinins and cryoproteins, since they are found
in 5% of cases. The presence of a cryoglobulin suggests
an underlying cause such as chronic hepatitis (B or C) or
lymphoreticular malignancy. Assays for serum histaminereleasing factors, and evaluation for specific autoantibodies
(anti-IgE receptor and anti-IgE) are done by some research
centers,***° but their utility in clinical practice is without a
substantial evidence base. Skin biopsy should be considered
if there are any atypical features that might raise the suspicion
of vasculitis, such as non-blanching lesions which may last
for > 48 hours and may leave residual marks, predominance
of pain in the lesions (with or without burning) rather than
pruritus, associated petechiae or purpura, and presence of
systemic symptoms such as fever, arthralgia, or arthritis.'°
In contrast, however, is usually not clinically helpful with
routine urticaria without those features.

The diagnostic work-up for CU is summarized in Table 2.
An algorithm for diagnosis and management of acute and CU
in the primary care setting is presented in Figure 1.

Treatment

The treatment regimen for urticaria needs to be individualized as
the severity and clinical pattern can vary considerably. As with
other allergic conditions, if a specific trigger of urticaria can
be identified (eg, physical stimuli, specific foods, medications,
and topical sensitizers), optimal treatment would involve
the avoidance of that specific trigger. If urticaria is ongoing,
food supplements and drugs that are nonessential should
be discontinued. Patients can keep a food diary to identify
suspect foods, which can then be eliminated. As explained
earlier, some cases of urticaria may be caused exclusively
by nonallergic triggers, and in other cases, urticaria may be
chronic but nonallergic triggers will lead to exacerbations.

Nonallergic triggers include aspirin, other NSAIDs,**”
opiates, and alcohol. The patient must be educated that such
agents may produce a temporary exacerbation. Psychosocial
stress plays a part in many patients by exacerbating urticaria,
although the mechanism for this is unclear.*°

Acute Urticaria

Acute urticaria is usually self-limited. In general, the main
goal of treating patients with acute urticaria is supportive,
aiming to suppress clinical manifestations. The treatment is
therefore based on the extent, intensity, and duration of the
symptoms and should be adapted based on response and course
of the urticaria. The most commonly used medications are
second-generation H,-receptor antagonists (antihistamines)
or glucocorticoids, alone or in combination when necessary.
H,-receptor antagonists are widely considered the first-line
agents for acute urticaria. Second-generation H,-receptor
antagonists are generally preferred over first-generation
H,-receptor antagonists, as discussed further in the next
section, but first-generation agents can be added in refractory
cases. The hives are often treated symptomatically until
they resolve spontaneously. Patients with life-threatening
angioedema or anaphylaxis should always have access to
epinephrine and be instructed to use it if needed.

Chronic Urticaria

As in acute urticaria, H,-receptor antagonists are considered
the first-line treatment of CU. While the older first-generation
H, antagonists (Table 3) are effective in reducing the symptoms and number of lesions of urticaria, they may lead to side
effects such as sedation, cognitive impairment, dry mouth,
and urinary retention. Because of these side effects, chronic
or around-the-clock use may not be desirable. The newer,
second-generation H, antagonists (Table 4) are generally
less sedating. Use of some of these drugs (eg, loratadine,
fexofenadine, desloratadine) does not result in increased rate
of sedation (compared with placebo) at the recommended
doses and are thus considered to be nonsedating. Some of the
second-generation agents (eg, cetirizine, levocetirizine) can
produce sedation in a minority of patients.°'** Although not to
the same degree as seen with first-generation agents,*!? these
drugs have been labeled by some clinicians as minimally
sedating. Second-generation agents are often used for chronic
or around-the-clock treatment, while the first-generation
agents are reserved for severe cases or acute exacerbations.
Some clinicians recommend the use of a second-generation
agent during the day, with a dose of a first-generation agent
at night. Since patients with clinically severe urticaria often

 

146 © Postgraduate Medicine, Volume 121, Issue |, January 2009, ISSN — 0032-5481, e-ISSN — 1941-9260
Downloaded by [Deakin University Library] at 18:37 05 November 2015

INDIVIDUAL USE ONLY, NOT TO BE DISTRIBUTED OR PRINTED FOR DISTRIBUTION. © JTE MULTIMEDIA, LLC

Chronic Urticaria for the PCP

 

Table 2. Diagnostic Work-Up for Urticaria

History and Physical Examination

© Onset (eg, timing of symptoms with change in living conditions or exposures)

¢ Frequency, duration, severity, and localization of wheals and itching

e Dependence of symptoms on the time of day, day of the week, season, menstrual cycle, etc.

¢ Known precipitating factors of urticaria (physical stimuli, exertion, stress, food, medications)

© Occupation and leisure activities

© Associated angioedema, systemic manifestations (headache, joint pain, gastrointestinal symptoms, etc.)

e Known allergies, intolerances, infections, systemic illnesses, or other possible causes

e Family history of urticaria and atopy
e Degree of impairment of quality of life

e Response to prior treatment

e Detailed physical examination (with special attention to dermographism)

Laboratory Evaluation (Chronic Urticaria)
= Routine evaluation
¢ Complete blood count with differential
¢ Sedimentation rate
© Some clinicians routinely perform chemistry and hepatic panels

= Additional routine evaluation by some specialty centers

¢ Thyroid-stimulating hormone, antimicrosomal antibodies, and antithyroglobulin antibodies

¢ Functional autoantibody assay

= Additional tests, likely to be helpful only if a specific diagnosis or entity is raised by the history, physical examination, and/or

 

jal screening laboratory work-up

¢ Complement system: eg, C3, C4, and CH,,

Stool analysis for ova and parasites

Helicobacter pylori work-up (limited evidence)

Hepatitis B and C work-up

Sinus radiography (if symptomatic)

Antinuclear antibody

Rheumatoid factor

Cryoglobulin levels

Other imaging studies

Skin tests

Physical challenge tests

Skin biopsy

Urinalysis

 

do not respond to these medications when they are given in
the approved doses, some clinicians have recommended giving them in up to twice the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA)-approved dose, although clinical evidence is limited
for this practice.

Doxepin, a tricyclic antidepressant, has potent H, and
H, antihistaminic activity and can be used as well (although
is not FDA-approved for urticaria).**°> Sedation, which
is the main disadvantage of this medication, can often be
managed by starting at the lowest effective dose (Table 3)

every night and then slowly increasing the dose if needed
and as tolerated. Additional problems with doxepin include
dry mouth, urinary retention, and increased appetite.*° While
hydroxyzine and cyproheptadine have traditionally been
used as the agents of choice for cold-induced urticaria, there
is little experimental evidence to support the notion that
specific H, antagonists may be more efficacious for certain
types of urticaria.

Given that 15% of the histamine receptors of the skin are of
the H,-type, the addition ofan H, antagonist (examples listed in

 

© Postgraduate Medicine, Volume 121, Issue I, January 2009, ISSN — 0032-5481, e-ISSN — 1941-9260 147
Downloaded by [Deakin University Library] at 18:37 05 November 2015

INDIVIDUAL USE ONLY, NOT TO BE DISTRIBUTED OR PRINTED FOR DISTRIBUTION. © JTE MULTIMEDIA, LLC

Umer Najib and Javed Sheikh

 

Figure I. Algorithm for the evaluation and management of urticaria in the primary care setting.

Acute Urticaria (< 6 weeks)

J

Identification of triggers through history and physical

examination.

|

Education and avoidance of triggers.
Stop nonessential medication, herbal supplements, and topicals.

J

H,-receptor antagonists (prefer nonsedating)
+/— brief course of steroids.
Consider injectable epinephrine if h/o angioedema/anaphylaxis.

J

If lasts > 6 weeks proceed to chronic urticaria

pathway

Table 5) to an H, antagonist in treating CU can be more effec
tive than an H, antagonist alone, as confirmed in some small

trials,°°>* although data have been conflicting in others.

Corticosteroids

Systemic corticosteroids are usually considered in acute or CU

that has not responded to H, antagonists. Although there are no

large-scale, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials of the long
term use of corticosteroids in CU,” clinical experience suggests

Table 3. Commonly Used First-Generation H, Antagonists

—S—>

Chronic Urticaria (> 6 weeks)

\f
Identification of triggers through history and physical
examination (Table 2). T

v

Education and avoidance of triggers.

Stop nonessential medication, herbal supplements, and topicals.

v
H,-receptor antagonists (prefer nonsedating)

+/— brief course of steroids.

Consider injectable epinephrine if h/o angioedema/anaphylaxis.

x
Add H,-receptor antagonist.

Labs: complete blood count with differential, erythrocyte
sedimentation rate, other labs based on specific clinical

suspicion. i]
v

 

 

Refer to specialist.

that these drugs are highly efficacious in most patients if an
adequate dose is used. Standard dosages (0.5—1.0 mg/kg/d)
can be used for initial dosing, with subsequent tapering to

maintain the desired response. A short course of corticoster
oids (from a few days to up to 6 weeks) in acute urticaria is

often helpful in achieving adequate symptom control.” Since

corticosteroid doses that are high enough to be effective can

have serious side effects if continued over the long term,

 

Drug

Recommended Adult Dosage

Dosage

Recommended Pediatric

Comments

 

Chlorpheniramine (Chlor-Trimeton®)

Cyproheptadine (Periactin®)

Diphenhydramine (Benadryl®)

Doxepin (Sinequan®)

Hydroxyzine (Atarax®, Vistaril®)

4 mg PO every 4-6h

10-20 mg per dose IV/IM/SC; not

to exceed 40 mg/d

2-4 mg PO 3 times daily

25-50 mg every 4-6 h PO/IV/IM

10-150 mg/d PO at bedtime
or divided 2 or 3 times daily

10-100 mg every 6-8 h PO/IM

2-6 y: | mg PO every 4-6 h;
not to exceed 4 mg/d.

6-12 y: 2 mg PO every 4-6 h;

not to exceed |2 mg/d.

2-6 y: 2 mg 2 or 3 times
daily. 7-14 y: 2-4 mg 2 or 3
times daily.

5 mg/kg/d PO/IV/IM divided
3 or 4 times daily; not to
exceed 300 mg/d

> 12 y: 10-50 mg/d PO at
bedtime or divided 2 or 3
times daily and can increase
gradually to 100 mg/d

0.6 mg/kg/dose PO every

6 h, 0.5—1 mg/kg/dose IM
every 4-6h

Pregnancy category B

Historically has been considered
a drug of choice for primary
acquired cold urticaria

Tricyclic antidepressant
Begin with a low dose
(10-25 mg at bedtime) first

 

Abbreviations: IM, intramuscularly; IV, intravenously; PO, orally; SC, subcutaneously.

 

148

© Postgraduate Medicine, Volume 121, Issue |, January 2009, ISSN — 0032-5481, e-ISSN — 1941-9260
Downloaded by [Deakin University Library] at 18:37 05 November 2015

INDIVIDUAL USE ONLY, NOT TO BE DISTRIBUTED OR PRINTED FOR DISTRIBUTION. © JTE MULTIMEDIA, LLC

Chronic Urticaria for the PCP

 

Table 4. Commonly Used Second-Generation H, Antagonists

a Aa as

Drug Recommended Adult Dosage

Recommended Pediatric Dosage Comments

 

Cetirizine (Zyrtec®) 5-10 mg PO once per day

Desloratadine (Clarinex®) 5 mg PO once per day

Fexofenadine (Allegra®) 60 mg PO 2 times daily

Loratadine (Claritin®) 10 mg PO once per day

Levocetirizine (Xyzal®) 2.5-5 mg PO once per day

6—12 mo: 2.5 mg PO once per day.
12-23 mo: 2.5 mg PO once per day

May cause sedation in
approximately 10%—-14%
to 2 times daily. 2-5 y: 2.5-5 mg

PO once per day or 2.5 mg PO

2 times daily. > 6 y: 5-10 mg PO once
per day.

of patients. Pregnancy
category B.

Not established for children < 12 y Rate of sedation similar
to that with placebo.
A metabolite of lorata
dine.

<6 yy: not established. 6-11 y: 30 mg
PO 2 times daily.

Rate of sedation similar
to that with placebo.

2-5 y: 5 mg PO once per day. > 6 y: Rate of sedation similar

administer as in adults. to that with placebo.

Pregnancy category B.

6-12 y: 2.5 mg PO once per day.
> 12 y: as per adults.

Pregnancy category B.

 

Abbreviations: IM, intramuscularly; IV, intravenously; PO, orally; SC, subcutaneously.

these agents should be used only when absolutely needed in
the treatment of CU.

Additional Pharmacotherapy
Options

Additional pharmacotherapy options are used by specialists
who treat patients with refractory urticaria (Table 6).
The primary care physician will likely not be involved in
the prescription of agents listed in Step 4 without specialist
assistance. Most of these agents have little evidence in the
form of clinical trials and are not FDA-approved for urticaria.
Intravenous gammaglobulin (IVIG), plasmapheresis, and
cyclosporine have been shown to be effective in urticaria in
a limited number of studies.°' ° They can be a consideration
in severe urticaria, particularly of the autoimmune type, that
is unresponsive to medications. Colchicine and dapsone have
also been reported to be useful for refractory urticaria and
urticarial vasculitis.“ As discussed previously, the role
of thyroxine in the treatment of CU is still uncertain.?Since mast cells release a variety of mediators in addition
to histamine, antileukotriene medications may be added; °°”
however, extensive clinical trials have not been performed,

Table 5. Commonly Used H, Antagonists
Drug Recommended Adult Dosage

Recommended Pediatric Dosage

so the usefulness of antileukotriene agents is still questionable. Early case reports and a clinical trial of omalizumab
(monoclonal antibody to IgE) in CU appear promising, but
considerable further study is needed. Case reports suggest
that hydroxychloroquine, nifedipine, sulfasalazine, azathioprine, and methotrexate may be useful in selected patients.
Many of these medications are limited by their side effect
profiles.

Conclusion

Urticaria is a common, debilitating condition seen by primary
care physicians. Acute urticaria is usually due to a hypersensitivity reaction or part of a viral syndrome, while CU
is generally idiopathic. Thirty percent to 50% of idiopathic
cases may be autoimmune and/or related to mast cell/basophil
abnormalities. Antihistamines remain the mainstay of pharmacotherapy for urticaria. In severe cases, referral to a specialist is warranted in order to minimize disease severity with
more aggressive treatment. Although there are a number of
treatment options for urticaria, further research is required
to develop safe and more effective agents.

Comments

 

Cimetidine (Tagamet®) 400 mg PO 2 times daily

Infants: 10-20 mg/kg/d divided every 6 h. Children:

Pregnancy category B

10-20 mg/kg/d divided every 6 h.

Ranitidine (Zantac®) 150 mg PO 2 times daily

1.5-2 mg/kg per dose PO 2 times daily

Pregnancy category B

 

Abbreviation: PO, orally.

 

© Postgraduate Medicine, Volume 121, Issue I, January 2009, ISSN — 0032-5481, e-ISSN — 1941-9260 149
Downloaded by [Deakin University Library] at 18:37 05 November 2015

INDIVIDUAL USE ONLY, NOT TO BE DISTRIBUTED OR PRINTED FOR DISTRIBUTION. © JTE MULTIMEDIA, LLC

Umer Najib and Javed Sheikh

 

Table 6. Proposed Algorithm for the Treatment of Chronic Urticaria

 

Begin at Step | and progress to higher steps only if needed. Treatment should be stepped down once control is achieved.

 

Step 4 |. Chronic oral corticosteroids (titrated to lowest effective dose)

2. Cyclosporin A (for steroid sparing effects)

3. Consider other nonstandard therapies: colchicine, dapsone, sulfasalazine, hydroxychloroquine, intravenous

gammaglobulin, plasmapheresis, interferon-c, methotrexate, cyclophosphamide, calcium-channel blockers,

warfarin, ephedrine, terbutaline

 

 

 

Step 3 |. Consider increasing dose of H,-receptor antagonist
2. Consider multiple simultaneous H,-receptor antagonists
3. Doxepin (for additional antihistamine effect)
4. Antileukotriene
5. If evidence of thyroid autoimmunity, consider thyroxine
Step 2 H,-receptor antagonist in combination with H,-receptor antagonist
Step | H,-receptor antagonists (antihistamines)
Disclaimer 11. Brodell LA, Beck LA, Saini SS. Pathophysiology of chronic urticaria.
. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2008;100(4):29 1-297.
The drugs, doses, and treatments discussed are thought tobe —_12. Hide M, Francis DM, Grattan CE, Hakimi J, Kochan JP, Greaves MW.
accurate by the authors as of the time of article submission. Autoantibodies against the high-affinity IgE receptor as a cause of
Z é z : histamine release in chronic urticaria. N Engl J Med. 1993;328(22):
Any changes since that date are not reflected in this article. 1599-1604.
13. Jacques P, Lavoie A, Bédard PM, Brunet C, Hébert J. Chronic idiopathic
Ac kn owl edgm ents urticaria: profiles of skin mast cell histamine release during active disease
. : . h 4 and remission. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1992;89(6):1139-1143.
No financial funding support was received for this article. 14. Sheikh J. Autoantibodies to the high-affinity IgE receptor in chronic
urticaria: how important are they? Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol.
. 2005;5(5):403—407.
Conflict of Interest Statement , 15. Goodman DL, McDonnell JT, Nelson HS, Vaughan TR, Weber RW.
Javed Sheikh, MD discloses conflicts of interest with sanofi Chronic urticaria exacerbated by the anti-oxidant food preservatives,
aventis and UCB. Umer Najib, MD discloses no conflicts butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA) and butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT).
- J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1990;86(4 pt 1):570-5S75.
of interest. 16. Zembowicz A, Mastalerz L, Setkowicz M, et al. Safety of cyclooxygenase
2 inhibitors and increased leukotriene synthesis in chronic idiopathic
urticaria with sensitivity to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Arch
References y ny ang
1. O’Donnell BF, Lawlor F, Simpson J. The impact of chronic urticaria Deri gee T 2003 TBC NST T-1S 8
. a 2 . 17. Kaplan AP. Chronic urticaria: pathogenesis and treatment. J Allergy
on the quality of life. Br J Dermatol. 1997;136(2):197-201. Clin Immunol. 2004;114(3):465-474 4
2. Kaplan AP. Urticaria angioedema. In: Allergy: Principles and Practice. ° , a : 43% ‘
” “ . 18. Leznoff A, Josse RG, Denburg J, Dolovich J. Association of chronic
Adkinson NF Jr, Busse WW, et al; eds. Philadelphia, PA: Mosby; . . . . . .
2003:1537-1558 urticaria and angioedema with thyroid autoimmunity. Arch Dermatol.
oe : ee F 1983;119(8):636-640.
3. Champion RH, Roberts SO, Carpenter RG, Roger JH. Urticaria and angio- 19. Zweiman B, Valenzano M, Atkins PC, Tanus T, Getsy JA. Characteredema. A review of 554 patients. Br J Dermatol. 1969;81(8):588-597. = E « y ey ‘ 4 F
. sa win ] istics of histamine-releasing activity in the sera of patients with chronic
4. Sheikh J. Urticaria. http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/137362- ce . Soap eas .
apie ‘NeGexsed Dewember 18.2008 idiopathic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1996;98(1):89-98.
5 Koulun APU nooo d ioed 3 “ All + Pri 1 d 20. Sabroe RA, Poon E, Orchard GE, et al. Cutaneous inflammatory cell
. a an dee a Recta, vii ae eg oo ae infiltrate in chronic idiopathic urticaria: comparison of patients with
ie eee enn VA a? ae and without anti-FcepsilonRI or anti-IgE autoantibodies. J Allergy Clin
losby-Year Book; : - i
fe : q La Immunol. 1999;103(3 pt 1):484-493.
6. Charlesworth EN. Urticaria and angioedema: a clinical spectrum. 21. Ying S, Kikuchi Y, Meng Q, Kay AB, Kaplan AP. TH1/TH2 cytokines and
Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 1996;76(6):484—495. j aca s 4 : :
3 en s inflammatory cells in skin biopsy specimens from patients with chronic
7. Greaves M. Chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2000; a * a ; " ,
105(4):664-672 idiopathic urticaria: comparison with the allergen-induced late-phase
8 Ww ( ee Fai le JA. Ellis CN. D. ism: Pe ET) a a cutaneous reaction. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2002;109(4):694-700.
eo ee 22. Sabroe RA, Grattan CE, Francis DM, Barr RM, Kobza Black A, Greaves
Dermatol. 1984;11 (4 pt 1):643-652. : i z a
9. Hirsch TV. Lawlor F. Enelish JS, Louback JB, Winkel RK MW. The autologous serum skin test: a screening test for autoantibodies
: Gren = af i re eee ‘. i — ‘ ie ee oe in chronic idiopathic urticaria. Br J Dermatol. 1999;140(3): 446-452.
sreaves MW. Cholinergic urticaria. A clinical and histologic study. 53. Grattan CE, Wallington TB, Warin RP, Kennedy CT, Bradfield JW.
Arch Dermatol. 1987;123(4):462-467. : . . coy . we oe .
i eg ae F A serological mediator in chronic idiopathic urticaria—a clinical, immuno10. Davis MD, Brewer JD. Urticarial vasculitis and hypocomplementemic P ° @ i : s
rticarial vasculitis syndrome. Immunol Allerey Clin North Am logical and histological evaluation. Br J Dermatol. 1986;114(5):583-590.
Be ofl es y : ® “24. Nguyen L, Sheikh J, Lin CK, et al. Serial basophil histamine release
ae eee: correlates with the clinical course in a patient with autoimmune urticaria.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2000;104:S40-S41.
150 © Postgraduate Medicine, Volume 121, Issue |, January 2009, ISSN — 0032-5481, e-ISSN — 1941-9260
Downloaded by [Deakin University Library] at 18:37 05 November 2015

INDIVIDUAL USE ONLY, NOT TO BE DISTRIBUTED OR PRINTED FOR DISTRIBUTION. © JTE MULTIMEDIA, LLC

Chronic Urticaria for the PCP

 

25,

26.

27.

28.

29,

30.

Grattan CE, Francis DM, Hide M, Greaves MW. Detection of circulating
histamine releasing autoantibodies with functional properties of anti-IgE
in chronic urticaria. Clin Exp Allergy. 1991;21(6):695—704.

Sabroe RA, Francis DM, Barr RM, Black AK, Greaves MW.
Anti-Fe(epsilon)RI auto antibodies and basophil histamine releasability
in chronic idiopathic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1998;102(4 pt 1):
651-658.

Ferrer M, Kinet JP, Kaplan AP. Comparative studies of functional
and binding assays for IgG anti-Fc(epsilon)RIalpha (alpha-subunit) in
chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1998;101(5):672-676.
Tong LJ, Balakrishnan G, Kochan JP, Kinét JP, Kaplan AP. Assessment
of autoimmunity in patients with chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin
Immunol. 1997;99(4):46 1465.

Asero R, Lorini M, Chong SU, Zuberbier T, Tedeschi A. Assessment of
histamine releasing activity of sera from patients with chronic urticaria
showing positive autologous skin test on human basophils and mast
cells. Clin Exp Allergy. 2004;34(7):1111-1114.

Mari A. Allergy-like asthma and rhinitis: a cross-sectional survey of

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

52,

Mullins RJ, Heddle R. Adverse reactions associated with echinacea: the
Australian experience. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2002;88(1):42-51.
Dibbern DA Jr. Urticaria: selected highlights and recent advances.
Med Clin North Am. 2006;90(1):187-209.

Knight TE, Hausen BM. Melaleuca oil (tea tree oil) dermatitis. J Am
Acad Dermatol. 1994;30(3):423-427.

Wong JT, Nagy CS, Krinzman SJ, et al. Rapid oral challengedesensitization for patients with aspirin-related urticaria-angioedema.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2000;105(5):997—-1001.

Grattan CE. Aspirin sensitivity and urticaria. Clin Exp Dermatol.
2003;28(2):123—-127.

Shertzer CL, Lookingbill DP. Effects of relaxation therapy and hypnotizability in chronic urticaria. Arch Dermatol. 1987;123(7):913-916.

. Kalivas J, Breneman D, Tharp M, Bruce S, Bigby M. Urticaria: clinical

efficacy of cetirizine in comparison with hydroxyzine and placebo.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1990;86(6 pt 2):1014-1018.

Breneman DL. Cetirizine versus hydroxyzine and placebo in chronic
idiopathic urticaria. Ann Pharmacother. 1996;30(10):1075—1079.

 

a respiratory cohort and a diagnostic approach using the autologous 53. Breneman D, Bronsky EA, Bruce S, et al. Cetirizine and astemizole
serum skin test. Jnt Arch Allergy Immunol. 2004;133(1):29-39. therapy for chronic idiopathic urticaria: a double-blind, placebo
31. Guttman-Yassky E, Bergman R, et al. The autologous serum skin test in controlled, comparative trial. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1995;33(2 pt 1):
acohort of chronic idiopathic urticaria patients compared to respiratory 192-198.
allergy patients and healthy individuals. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 54. Harto A, Sendagorta E, Ledo A. Doxepin in the treatment of chronic
2007;21(1):35-39. urticaria. Dermatologica. 1985;170(2):90-93.

32. Vasagar K, Vonakis BM, Gober L, Viksman A, Gibbons SP Jr, Saini SS. 55. Goldsobel AB, Rohr AS, Siegel SC, et al. Efficacy of doxepin in the
Evidence of in vivo basophil activation in chronic idiopathic urticaria. treatment of chronic idiopathic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
Clin Exp Allergy. 2006;36(6):770—776. 1986;78(5 pt 1):867-873.

33. Soundararajan S, Kikuchi Y, Joseph K, Kaplan AP. Functional assess- 56. Monroe EW, Cohen SH, Kalbfleisch J, Schulz CI. Combined H,
ment of pathogenic IgG subclasses in chronic autoimmune urticaria. and H, antihistamine therapy in chronic urticaria. Arch Dermatol.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2005;115(4):815-821. 1981;117:404—407.

34. Kikuchi Y, Kaplan AP. Mechanisms of autoimmune activation of | 57. Harvey RP, Wegs J, Schocket AL. A controlled trial of therapy in
basophils in chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2001;107(6): chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1981;68(4):262-266.
1056-1062. 58. Blechen SS, Thomas SE, Greaves MW, et al. Cimetidine and chlorphe
35. Yasnowsky KM, Dreskin SC, Efaw B, et al. Chronic urticaria sera niramine in the treatment of chronic idiopathic urticaria: a multi-center
increase basophil CD203c expression. J Allergy Clin Immunol. randomized double-blind study. Br J Dermatol. 1987;117(1):81-88.
2006;117(6):1430-1434. 59. Cook LJ, Shuster S. Lack of effect of cimetidine in chronic-idiopathic

36. Sheikh J. Effect of omalizumab on patients with chronic urticaria: issues urticaria. Acta Derm Venereol. 1983;63(3):265—267.
with the determination of autoimmune urticaria. Ann Allergy Asthma 60. Kaplan AP. Clinical practice: Chronic urticaria and angioedema. N Engl
Immunol. 2008;100(1):88. J Med. 2002;346(3):175-179.

37. Saini S, Vasagar K, Huang F, Gibbons S, Vonakis BM. Signaling defects in 61. O’Donnell BF, Barr RM, Black AK, et al. Intravenous immunoglobulin in
basophils in chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2003;111:S178. autoimmune chronic urticaria. Br J Dermatol. 1998;138(1):101—106.

38. Grattan CE, Walpole D, Francis DM, et al. Flow cytometric analysis of 62. Grattan CE, Francis DM, Slater NG, Barlow RJ, Greaves MW.
basophil numbers in chronic urticaria: basophilia is related to serum his- Plasmapheresis for severe unremitting chronic urticaria. Lancet.
tamine releasing activity. Clin Exp Allergy. 1997;27(12):1417-1424. 1992;339(8801):1078-1080.

39. Wanderer AA. Cold urticaria syndromes: historical background, 63. Toubi E, Blant A, Kessel A, Golan TD. Low-dose cyclosporin in
diagnostic classification, clinical and laboratory characteristics, the treatment of severe chronic idiopathic urticaria. Allergy. 1997;
pathogenesis, and management. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1990;85(6): 52(3):312-316.

965-981. 64. Werni R, Schwarz T, Gschnait F. Colchicine treatment of urticarial

40. Amar SM, Dreskin SC. Urticaria. Prim Care. 2008;35(1):141—157. vasculitis. Dermatologica. 1986;172(1):36—40.

41. Irinyi B, Széles G, Gyimesi E, et al. Clinical and laboratory examina- 65. Ruzicka T, Goerz G. Systemic lupus erythematosus and vasculitic
tions in the subgroups of chronic urticaria. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. urticaria. Effect of dapsone and complement levels. Dermatologica.
2007; 144(3):217-225. 1981;162(3):203-205.

42. Rumbyrt JS, Katz JL, Schocket AL. Resolution of chronic urticaria 66. Nettis E, Dambra P, D’Oronzio L, Loria MP, Ferrannini A, Tursi A.
in patients with thyroid autoimmunity. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1995; Comparison of montelukast and fexofenadine for chronic idiopathic
96(6 pt 1):901-905. urticaria. Arch Dermatol. 2001;137(1):99-100.

43. Leznoff A, Sussman GL. Syndrome of idiopathic chronic urticariaand 67. Asero R, Tedeschi A, Lorini M. Leukotrience receptor antagonist in
angioedema with thyroid autoimmunity: a study of 90 patients. J Allergy chronic urticaria. Allergy. 2001;56(5):456-457.

Clin Immunol. 1989;84(1):66-71. 68. Gober LM, Sterba PM, Eckman JA, Saini SS. Effect of anti-IgE (omali
44, Joint Task Force on Practice Parameters. The diagnosis and manage- zumab) in chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU) patients. J Allergy Clin
ment of urticaria: a practice parameter part I: acute urticaria/angioedema Immunol. 2008;121. Abstract 566.
part II: chronic urticaria/angioedema. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol.

2000;85(6 pt 2):521-544.
© Postgraduate Medicine, Volume 121, Issue |, January 2009, ISSN — 0032-5481, e-ISSN — 1941-9260 151
