| Check for
DOI: 10.1111/pde.14360 | updates

Received: 8 May 2020 Revised: 5 August 2020 Accepted: 15 August 2020

 

 

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Pediatric
Dermatology WILEY

Efficacy of omalizumab treatment for pediatric chronic
spontaneous urticaria: A multi-center retrospective case series

Anne AriMD*® | YaelLevy MD*? | Nirit Segal MD* | Ramit Maoz-Segal MD® |
Shira Benor MD?* | Arnon Broides MD>” | Amir Horev MD*” | Na'ama Epstein-Rigbi
MD® | Nancy Agmon-Levin MD2? | Nufar Marcus MD*?

1Kipper Institute of Immunology and Allergy,

Schneider Children's Medical Center of
Israel, Petach Tikva, Israel

*sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv, Israel

$Clinical Immunology, Angioedema and
Allergy Unit, Center for Autoimmune
diseases, Sheba Medical Center, Tel
Hashomer, Israel

“Allergy and Clinical Immunology Unit,
Department of Medicine, Tel Aviv Sourasky
Medical Center and Sackler Faculty of
Medicine, University of Tel Aviv, Tel Aviv,
Israel

5Pediatric Immunology Clinic, Soroka
University Medical Center & Faculty of
Health Services, Ben-Gurion University of
the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel

Pediatric Dermatology Services, Soroka
University Medical Center & Faculty of
Health Services, Ben-Gurion University of
the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel

7Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel

®Institute of Allergy, Immunology, and
Paediatric Pulmonology, Yitzhak Shamir
Medical Centre, Beer Yaakov, Israel

Correspondence

Nufar Marcus, Kipper Institute of
Immunology and Allergy, Schneider
Children's Medical Center of Israel, Petach
Tikva, Israel.

Email:nofarmk@clalit.org.il

1 | INTRODUCTION

Chronic urticaria is defined by the presence of itchy wheals, some
times accompanied by angioedema with disease activity lasting for

 

Abstract

Background: Chronic urticaria is defined by the presence of itchy wheals, sometimes
accompanied by angioedema, lasting for at least 6 weeks. In children, most cases
occur without an eliciting factor and are defined as chronic spontaneous urticaria
(CSU). CSU affects up to 0.75% of children with a negative impact on quality of life and
school performance. CSU is treated in adults with second-generation antihistamines,
increased up to four times normal doses for second-line treatment. Omalizumab (a
monoclonal antibody to IgE) may be recommended as third-line therapy. A similar
protocol is used in children, yet little is known of its efficacy and safety.

Objectives: To summarize our multi-center experience in treating children with recalcitrant CSU with omalizumab.

Methods: A retrospective multi-center case series conducted in 5 tertiary care centers in Israel. Patients included were children <18 years old diagnosed with recalcitrant CSU who were treated with omalizumab. Patients were followed up throughout
the duration of omalizumab therapy/symptom remission. Patients’ electronic medical
records were used to gather data.

Results: Nineteen participants (11 F; 8 M) presented with CSU between ages 6 and
16.9 years. Sixteen (84%) responded to omalizumab, including children <12 years old,
although two became non-responsive after 6-12 months of therapy. Another three
patients (16%) were resistant to treatment, achieving remission through fourth-line

(Cyclosporine A) or other therapies.

 

Conclusion: Children with recalcitrant CSU, even those <12 years old, respond well
to standard-dose, third-line omalizumab therapy at rates similar to adults. Yet, some

cases may become non-responsive with ongoing treatment.

KEYWORDS

chronic urticaria, omalizumab, pediatric chronic urticaria, recalcitrant urticaria

at least 6 weeks. In children, most cases occur without a known eliciting factor and are therefore defined as chronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU). CSU affects up to 0.75% of children? with a negative
impact on their quality of life and most importantly, on their school

performance.”

 

Pediatric Dermatology. 2020;00:1-4.

wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/pde © 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC. £
ARI ETAL.

 

2 Pediatric
‘WI LEY—Dermatology

Initial management of CSU in adults includes second-generation
antihistamines, which are increased up to four times normal doses for
second-line therapy. If symptoms are still not well-controlled, add-on
third-line treatment with omalizumab (a humanized monoclonal antibody that binds IgE) is recommended.** A similar treatment protocol
is used in children, even though its safety and efficacy in this population are largely unstudied and the therapy in those under 12 years of
age is used off-label for this indication. A recent literature review notes
high efficacy of second-generation antihistamines for the treatment of
pediatric CSU, while a few reports describe the use of omalizumab in
more recalcitrant cases.° The aim of this case series was to summarize
our multi-center experience in treating children suffering from recalcitrant CSU with omalizumab as add-on third-line treatment.

2 | METHODS

We conducted a multi-center retrospective study in the allergy/
dermatology units at 5 tertiary-care centers in Israel. Children
<18 years at presentation who were clinically diagnosed with CSU
by an allergist/ dermatologist were included. All were treated with
antihistamines up to fourfold regular dose and concurrently treated
with montelukast. Corticosteroids were administered during acute
episodes. If their symptoms did not improve within 6 months, omalizumab was given as add-on third-line therapy, in most cases, at a
standard dose of 300 mg/4 weeks. The dose of omalizumab was in
accordance with previous reports in smaller pediatric cases series
who had administered standard adult doses to their pediatric patients.° Patients were followed up throughout the duration of omalizumab therapy or until symptom relief.

Patients' electronic medical records (EMR) were used to identify
demographic factors, accompanying symptoms, concurrent atopic/
autoimmune disease, and treatment response. Atopic background
was defined as physician-diagnosed atopic dermatitis, asthma, allergic rhinitis, or food allergy. The medical records were screened
for the presence of autoimmune antibodies (eg, anti-thyroid peroxidase, anti-thyroglobulin, celiac screen, and antinuclear antibodies)
or frank autoimmune disease, as diagnosed by a physician subspecialist. Clinical response to treatment was recorded in the EMR as
per patient/caretaker report. A standardized clinical scoring system
(eg, Urticaria Activity Score/ UAS7) was not used due to poor and
inconsistent compliance with this measure in our pediatric patient
population. Failure of antihistamine and montelukast therapy was
declared when symptoms continued despite continuous treatment.

This study was approved by the respective institutional review

boards.
3 | RESULTS
Nineteen pediatric patients were included in our study.

Characteristics of the study participants are presented in Table 1.
Nine patients were diagnosed with CSU at age <12 years old.

Approximately one-quarter of our patients suffered from an
atopic disease. Nearly half were positive for autoimmune antibodies
(including antinuclear, anti-Smith, anti-thyroid peroxidase, anti-ribonucleoprotein, and anti-tissue transglutaminase antibodies) with
4 subsequently being diagnosed with an autoimmune disease (systemic lupus erythematosus, juvenile idiopathic arthritis JIA], hyperthyroidism or celiac disease).

Data regarding treatment response are presented in Table 2.
Sixteen of the 19 patients (84%) responded to add-on treatment
with omalizumab. The age range at the beginning of omalizumab
therapy was between 8 and 18 years. All but two patients were
treated at a dose of 300 mg every 4 weeks. Seven patients were less
than 12 years of age and were treated off-label with omalizumab.
Six of these were treated at a standard adult dose of 300 mg every
4 weeks. Those with a good response to omalizumab therapy continued therapy for 6-24 months.

All the responders noted a significant improvement in their
symptoms within the first days and up to 2 months of beginning
treatment. Omalizumab therapy was well-tolerated with no reported
side effects, even in the youngest of our patients.

Of the 16 responders, 13 achieved full remission with add-on omalizumab therapy; about half the responders maintained remission on
omalizumab monotherapy. Another 3 were partial responders. One
became symptom-free upon concomitant use of corticosteroids, antihistamines (4x normal doses), montelukast, and 600mg monthly omalizumab treatment. Two patients initially responded to omalizumab but
experienced symptom relapse within 6-12 months of treatment, ultimately achieving symptom relief with the addition of cyclosporine A.

Three (16%) study participants were resistant to treatment with
omalizumab. One of these patients, who failed to respond to 3 doses
of omalizumab over a period of two months (achieving a monthly
dose of 450 mg), was placed on 4th line therapy with cyclosporine A
with a rapid response. Another patient, who was subsequently diagnosed with systemic JIA, entered remission after appropriate corticosteroid treatment for her underlying condition. The third patient
suffered from severe atopic disease; her CSU symptoms abated with

dupilumab, used to treat her atopic dermatitis.

TABLE 1 Characteristics of study participants

Characteristics of study participants

Female: Male 11:8

Average age at urticaria onset in years (range) 12 (6-16.9)
Concomitant angioedema 6/19 (31%)
Concomitant inducible? urticaria 6/19 (31%)
Atopic background? 5/19 (26%)

Autoimmune antibodies 8/19 (42%)

Autoimmune disease 3/19 (16%)

*Defined as urticaria induced by environmental stimuli, such as heat,
cold, pressure applied to the skin, exercise, water, vibration, and
sunlight.

Defined as suffering from either one or more of the following
conditions: atopic dermatitis, asthma, food allergy, and allergic rhinitis.
TABLE 2 Treatment response to Omalizumab

Patient

wo Ont aun Rk wWH

RPP RP PBB
RON FPO

15

16

17
18
19

Gender

me ce el ES Gal al et“ SH aa el

Age CSU presentation
(Years)

10
16.5
16
10.5
10

15
14
16.5
10.3
13
14.5
10
8.5

14

16.9
a2
11.5

Symptom duration until

Omalizumab Initiated (years)

5
was)
1

A
0.5
a
0.75
0.5
0.5
tt
0.6
0.5
0.5
0.5

0.5

0.5
ATS:
0.5

Omalizumab
dose/4 wk

300 mg
300 mg
300 mg
300 mg
300 mg
150 mg
150 mg
300 mg
300 mg
300 mg
300 mg
300 mg
300 mg
600 mg

300 mg

450 mg

450 mg
300 mg
300mg

Omalizumab treatment
duration (in months)

18
12
2
A)
18
8
9
6
24

15
te

12

16

Responded initially to
omalizumab treatment?

<<<<<<<<< << <<<

Final symptom relief
achieved by:

Omalizumab
Omalizumab
Omalizumab
Omalizumab
Omalizumab
Omalizumab
Omalizumab
Omalizumab
Omalizumab
Omalizumab
Omalizumab
Omalizumab
Omalizumab

Omalizumab+
Corticosteroids+
Antihistamines (4x)+
Montelukast

Omalizumab+
Cyclosporine A

Omalizumab+
Cyclosporine A

Cyclosporine A
Corticosteroids

Dupiluma

a La lMVy

 

d14ye1paq

Abojoyews3q

"Blan IM—
ARI ETAL.

 

4 Pediatric
‘WI LEY—Dermatology

4 | DISCUSSION

In our case series of recalcitrant CSU in the pediatric population,
we found that children responded well to third-line treatment with
omalizumab, with 84% achieving symptom relief. This rate was similar to response rates observed in adults.” Omalizumab was given, in
most cases, at a standard dose of 300 mg every 4 weeks with a good
safety profile and compliance, even when given off-label in children
younger than 12 years of age. As such, our study supports its use in
children at doses and intervals similar to adults. This is an important
finding as better control of CSU symptoms in children likely has a
positive impact on school and social performance at this key developmental stage.

Of note, two (12.5%) of the patients who had initially responded well to omalizumab suddenly became non-responsive after
6-12 months of efficacious treatment. The reason for this sudden
non-response is perplexing and does not appear to be related to
age/gender of the patients, duration of CSU, dosage of omalizumab,
concomitant atopic/ autoimmune background, or compliance to
treatment, although the number of non-responders is so small that
statistically meaningful conclusions cannot be drawn.

Furthermore, 16% of our patients never responded to omalizumab. In these cases, cyclosporine A was effective as fourth-line
therapy. In patients with a strong atopic background, "off-label"
treatment with dupilumab may also be considered, as suggested by
another case report.®

Although to the best of our knowledge, this is the largest study
known to date describing the use of omalizumab in recalcitrant pediatric CSU, the sample size is still small and is a limitation of our study.
Another drawback is that treatment response was measured by
patient/ parental monthly symptom report rather than direct faceto-face examination. This was attributable to lack of compliance
with frequent clinical visits, especially when the rash subsided with
treatment. We also failed to achieve consistent compliance with the
use of a standardized clinical scoring system (eg, Urticaria Activity
Score/ UAS7).

In conclusion, our study suggests that children with recalcitrant CSU, even those <12 years old, respond well to omalizumab
as add-on therapy, at rates similar to adults. Nevertheless, some

(12.5%) may become non-responsive despite ongoing therapy.

ORCID
Anne Ari © https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3569-2361

REFERENCES

1. Balp MM, Weller K, Carboni V, et al. Prevalence and clinical characteristics of chronic spontaneous urticaria in pediatric patients. Pediatr
Allergy Immunol. 2018;29(6):630-636.

2. Ferrer M. Epidemiology, healthcare, resources, use and clinical features of different types of urticaria.Allergologica 2005. J Investig
Allergol Clin Immunol. 2009;19(Suppl 2):21-26.

3. Zuberbier T, Aberer W, Asero R, et al. The EAACI/GA?LEN/EDF/
WAO Guidelines for the definition, classification. Diagnosis and management of urticaria. Allergy. 2018;73(7):1393-1414.

4. Larenas-Linnemann DES, Parisi CAS, Ritchie C, et al. Update on omalizumab for urticaria: what's new in the literature from mechanisms to
clinic. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep. 2018;18(5):33.

5. Ben-Shoshan M, Grattan CE. Management of pediatric urticaria with
review of the literature on chronic spontaneous urticaria in children.
J Allergy Clin Immunol Practice. 2018;6(4):1152-1161.

6. Metz M, Ohanyan T, Church MK, Maurer M. Omalizumab is an effective and rapidly acting therapy in difficult-to-treat chronic urticaria: a
retrospective clinical analysis. J Dermatol Sci. 2014;73(1):57-62.

7. Vadasz Z, Tal Y, Rotem M, et al. Omalizumab for severe chronic spontaneous urticaria: real-life experiences of 280 patients. J Allergy
Clinical Immunol Pract. 2017;5(6):1743-1745.

8. Lee JK, Simpson RS. Dupilumab as a novel therapy for difficult to
treat chronic spontaneous urticaria. J Allergy Clinical Immunol Pract.
2019;7(5):1659-1661.e1.

How to cite this article: Ari A, Levy Y, Segal N, et al. Efficacy
of omalizumab treatment for pediatric chronic spontaneous
urticaria: A multi-center retrospective case series. Pediatr
Dermatol. 2020;00:1-4. https://doi.org/10.1111/pde.14360

 
