Clin Drug Investig
DOI 10.1007/s40261-015-0267-9

ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE

Omalizumab for Difficult-to-Treat Dermatological Conditions:
Clinical and Immunological Features from a Retrospective

Real-Life Experience

Ciro Romano - Ausilia Sellitto - Umberto De Fanis - Antonella Balestrieri Alfonso Savoia - Salvatore Abbadessa « Corrado Astarita - Giacomo Lucivero

© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015

Abstract

Background Omalizumab, a therapeutic monoclonal
antibody specific for human IgE, has thus far been used as
add-on therapy for moderate-to-severe allergic asthma in
adults and children.

Objective The objective of this study was to test omalizumab efficacy in other conditions in which the IgE-mast
cell axis is supposed to play a role.

Methods Nine patients with dermatological manifestations
possibly related to activation of the IgE-mast cell axis (six
chronic spontaneous urticaria and three atopic dermatitis
patients) were administered off-label omalizumab because of
refractoriness to standard therapy. All patients were subjected
to strict clinical, laboratoristic, and imaging follow-up to
monitor for possible adverse effects. In addition, to further

 

 

C. Romano (DX) - A. Sellitto - U. De Fanis - G. Lucivero
Division of Internal Medicine, Allergy and Clinical
Immunology, Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences,
Second University of Naples School of Medicine,

80138 Naples, Italy

e-mail: ciro.romano @unina2.it

 

 

 

Present Address:
A. Sellitto
“San Giuseppe Moscati” Hospital, Aversa, CE, Italy

Present Address:
U. De Fanis
Clinic Center, Naples, Italy

A. Balestrieri - A. Savoia - C. Astarita

Allergy Clinic, “F. Magrassi-A. Lanzara” Department of
Clinical and Experimental Medicine and Surgery, Second
University of Naples, Naples, Italy

S. Abbadessa

Immunopathology Unit, Department of Laboratory Medicine,
Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy

Published online: 13 January 2015

assess the role of omalizumab on T cells, mast cells, and
eosinophils, T-cell immune polarisation as well as eosinophil
cationic protein and tryptase serum levels were determined
before and during omalizumab administration.

Results Therapy was effective in seven out of nine
patients (six complete responses, one partial response, and
two no responses). Interestingly, omalizumab appeared to
induce lymphocyte polarisation toward a type 2 immune
response and to be able to quench eosinophil-mediated
inflammation, particularly in atopic dermatitis patients.
Tryptase serum levels were generally low and remained
unchanged during omalizumab treatment. Despite treatment
spanning over several years in most of the patients, no
adverse effects nor new ensuing medical conditions have
thus far been observed (median follow-up: 42 months).
Conclusions Off-label omalizumab was safe and effective in our patients. The novel immunologic features
recorded in our patients add further complexity to the
mechanism of action of omalizumab.

Omalizumab can also be considered for refractory
atopic dermatitis if total IgE levels fall within the
range of neutralisation by the monoclonal antibody

Novel mechanisms of action include modulation of
type | vs. type 2 immune responses and quenching of
eosinophil-mediated inflammation

Dermatological conditions treated with omalizumab
may be maintained in clinical control with very low
doses, which may render this therapeutic strategy
cost-effective with time

4 Adis
1 Introduction

Omalizumab, a therapeutic monoclonal antibody specific
for human IgE, has been in use for more than a decade as
add-on therapy for moderate-to-severe allergic asthma in
adults and children. Omalizumab is highly effective in
asthma and is generally well-tolerated [1]. Its mechanism of
action basically involves neutralisation of circulating free
IgE, which consequently leads to reduction of mast cellbound IgE, down-regulation of high affinity IgE receptors
(FceRI) and, eventually, prevention of mediator release [2,
3]. Since the IgE-mast cell axis plays a role in many diseases other than asthma, it is conceivable that omalizumab
may work as well in such settings. Indeed, in accordance
with the single airway disease theory [4], omalizumab has
also been shown to be effective in allergic rhinitis [5].
Moreover, following a number of case reports and small
series describing the beneficial effects of omalizumab in
chronic spontaneous urticaria [6-12], results from phase II
and III multicentre, randomized, placebo-controlled trials in
this condition have been recently become available [13-16].
Therefore, based on these studies, omalizumab has been
granted marketing authorisation for chronic spontaneous
urticaria by both the European Medicines Agency (EMA)
and the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) earlier
this year, although it has yet to be prescribed for this indication in many countries, including Italy. However, since a
significant proportion of chronic spontaneous urticaria
patients do not apparently harbour circulating IgE with
known allergen specificity and, in many cases, serum IgE in
chronic spontaneous urticaria patients may be even low, a
more complex mechanism of action has to be considered to
explain efficacy of omalizumab in this peculiar dermatological condition. Following serum IgE neutralisation, the
subsequent down-regulation of high affinity IgE receptors
on mast cells has initially been claimed as the main effect
conditioning efficacy of omalizumab in chronic spontaneous urticaria [17]. Moreover, since FceRI-bound IgE has
been shown to sustain proliferation and survival of mast
cells as well as to decrease the mediator release threshold
[18, 19], it appeared obvious that omalizumab, by depleting
free IgE, could interfere with all of these effects. Recently, a
further mechanism of action has been proposed, based on
the observation that a proportion of chronic spontaneous
urticaria patients have circulating IgE specific for such
autoantigens as thyroperoxidase and dsDNA [20, 21]; by
lowering free IgE, down-regulating mast cell and basophil
FceRL, and favouring sequestration of autoantigens by IgEomalizumab immunocomplexes, omalizumab may prevent
mast cell degranulation in this subset of chronic urticaria.
However, despite all these insights, the mechanism of
action of omalizumab has yet to be completely elucidated

 

4 Adis

C. Romano et al.

[22]. Clinical observation indeed suggests additional
mechanisms of action, since omalizumab has frequently
displayed a very rapid onset of action [6-16], full activity
well beyond the half-life of the drug and/or at suboptimal
doses for IgE neutralisation, and, finally, no inhibition of
mast cell degranulation in vivo [9]. It has been frequently
reported that, in contrast to asthma, chronic spontaneous
urticaria patients do not apparently need their omalizumab
dose and administration schedule be calculated based on
body weight and serum total IgE concentration [6-16].
Although beneficial effects have been reported in other
conditions pathogenically characterised by proven or possible
IgE involvement (i.e., atopic dermatitis, food allergy, specific
immunotherapy, mastocytosis, anaphylaxis, etc.), scant evidence is currently available for other possible future indications [23, 24]. Here, we report our real-life experience with
off-label omalizumab in dermatological conditions whose
pathogenesis may suggest involvement of the IgE-mast cell
axis, providing further clinical data on the efficacy and safety
of omalizumab in these settings and adding new pieces to the
complex puzzle of omalizumab mechanism of action.

2 Patients, Materials, and Methods
2.1 Patients

Since 2008, nine patients (six suffering from chronic
spontaneous urticaria and three with atopic dermatitis,
diagnosed according to standard criteria [25, 26]) have
been subjected thus far to off-label treatment with omalizumab. All patients had unsatisfactory control of their
dermatological condition with standard therapy. Characteristics of the patients are summarised in Table 1. For all
patients, laboratory and instrumental parameters were
monitored before starting omalizumab and every three to
6 months thereafter, as appropriate (Table 2). Complete
response was defined as complete resolution of symptoms
and signs of disease; partial response was defined as significant clinical improvement despite persistence of disease, using the urticaria activity score over 7 days (UAS7)
[27] and the SCORAD (SCORing Atopic Dermatitis) index
[26] for chronic spontaneous urticaria and atopic dermatitis, respectively; no response was considered in case of no
benefit at all. All patients gave their informed consent prior
to their inclusion in the study. The study was approved by
the institutional ethics committee.

2.2 Flow Cytometry

Immunophenotyping and flow cytometric identification of
circulating lymphocytes were performed before and during
omalizumab therapy, according to standard protocols used
SIPV 7

Table 1 Characteristics of patients

 

Patient Disease Age Sex Duration Total Concomitant Concomitant ASST/ Previous Omalizumab Time to and Current Time on Follow-up
of disease IgE atopy autoimmune BHRA therapy schedule type of response maintenance active (months)
(kU/L) thyroiditis schedule treatment
(months)
1 CU 53. =F 13 years 557 Yes No Negative AH, S, 300 mg 48 h; CR 150 mg every 6 to 78 78
LTRA, C, every 8 weeks
Cy 2 weeks
2 AD 22 M Since 10,208 Yes No NA S, AH, Cy 300 mg 2 weeks; PR: Dropped out wi 716
infancy every SCORAD index
2 weeks slowly declined
from 50 to 30 in
4 months
3 CU 35 M — 3 years 207 No No Negative AH, S, 300 mg 48 h; CR 150 mg every 64 64
LTRA every 8 weeks
2 weeks
4 AD 19 M Since 856 Yes No NA S, AH, tP, 300 mg 2 weeks; CR achieved Currently tapered off 42 50
infancy tT every in 4 months (initial with sustained
2 weeks SCORAD index: complete response?
43) Previously, 150 mg
every 8 weeks
5 CU 50. oF 5 months 114 Yes Yes Negative AH, S, 300 mg 24 h; PR followed by Terminated (sustained 4 41
LTRA, C every CR complete response)
4 weeks*
6 CU 52. =F 3 years 192 Yes No Negative AH, S 300 mg 2 weeks; CR 150 mg every 42 42
every 4 6 weeks
weeks
7 CU 73 F 9 months 6.3 No Yes Negative AH, S, 150 mg NR Terminated for 5 42
LTRA, C, every inefficacy
Cy 4 weeks*
8 AD 20  F 11 years 821 Yes No NA S, AH 450 mg 2 weeks; 4 months to Unmodified (attempts 18 18
every nearly complete at tapering resulted
2 weeks response (SCORAD in relapse)
down from 46 to 13)
9 CU 56 =F 14 years 21.7 Yes No Negative AH, S, 150 every NR Terminated for 4 10
LTRA, 4 weeks* inefficacy
Cy

 

CU chronic urticaria, AD atopic dermatitis, ASST autologous serum skin test, BHRA basophil histamine release assay, NA not applicable, AH antihistamines, S steroids, LTRA leukotriene receptor
antagonists, C cinnarizin, Cy cyclosporin, tP topical pimecrolimus, tT topical tacrolimus, CR complete response, PR partial response, NR no response

* Escalated up to 300 mg every 2 weeks after unsatisfactory response

» Sustained complete response: drug-free remission >6 months

snneuneg oidoyy pue eueonipg 10j qeunzipeuQ
C. Romano et al.

Table 2 Biochemical and instrumental investigations carried out in patients administered omalizumab*

 

Standard biochemical profile”

Complete blood count with differential

Serum protein electrophoresis

Serum immunoglobulin isotypes (IgG, IgA, IgM, IgE) and complement C3 and C4
Serum specific IgE“*

Circulating lymphocyte subsets

Autoimmunity profile (RF, ANA, anti-dsDNA, AMA, ASMA, anti-ENA, ANCA, cryoglobulins)
Cancer markers*

HBsAg and HCVAb*

Thyroid function screening’

Stool examination for parasites®°

Stool examination for Helicobacter pylori®°

Urinanalysis

ASST or basophil histamine release test*°

ECG’

Chest X-ray"

Abdominal US scan"

 

RF rheumatoid factor, ANA anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-dsDNA anti-double stranded DNA, AMA anti-mitochondrial antibodies, ASMA antismooth muscle antibodies, ENA extractable nuclear antigens, ANCA anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, HBsAg hepatitis B surface antigen,
HCVAb hepatitis C virus antibodies, ASST autologous serum skin test, ECG electrocardiogram, US ultrasound, CEA carcinoembryonic antigen,
a-FP a-fetoprotein, CA cancer (carbohydrate) antigen

* Repeated every 3-6 months, unless otherwise stated

> Includes: erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C reactive protein, electrolytes, calcium, phosphorus, glucose, urea nitrogen, creatinine, total protein,
triglycerids, cholesterol, aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, pseudocholinesterase, y-glutamyltranspeptidase, alkaline phosphatase, bilirubin, iron, ferritin, transferrin, uric acid, amylase, creatine kinase, lactate dehydrogenase

© Tested allergens include those comprised in the ImmunoCAP® ISAC (Immuno Solid-phase Allergen Chip) microarray system (Phadia,
Thermo Scientific) for the most recent patients; before availability of the multiplex ISAC test, patients were usually screened for the following
allergens: house dust mite, grass pollen, wall pellitory, cypress, olive, birch, mugwort, cat and dog dander, latex, wheat, egg white, tomato, milk,

soy, peanut, tree nut, apple, peach, Anisakis simplex

4 Include: CEA, a-FP, CA19-9, CA125, CA15-3, CA50, B2-microglobulin, thymidine kinase

© Only on admission

* Includes: thyrotropin, free thyroxine, free triiodothyronine, anti-peroxidase and anti-thyroglobulin autoantibodies

® Only for chronic urticaria patients

5 Before starting omalizumab and at yearly intervals thereafter, if normal

in our laboratory, as previously detailed [28, 29]. All
fluorochrome-conjugated monoclonal antibodies were
obtained from BD Biosciences (San Diego, CA, USA),
unless otherwise stated. Apart from evaluation of standard
lymphocyte subsets (T, B, NK, and NK-T cells), in order to
investigate whether omalizumab could affect the relative
balance between Thl/Tcl and Th2/Tc2 lymphocytes
(mediators of type 1 and type 2 immune responses,
respectively), immunophenotyping was also performed
using very specific surface markers for the above T-cell
subsets, namely CCRS5 (for Thl/Tcl cells) [30, 31] and
CRTH2 (for Th2/Tc2 cells) [32-34]. To facilitate evaluation of omalizumab effects on type 1 and type 2 immune
responses, the CCR5/CRTH2 ratio was used, as previously
described [35, 36]; thus, an increasing CCR5/CRTH2 ratio
was deemed indicative of a switch toward a predominant
type 1 immune response, whereas a decreasing CCR5/

4 Adis

CRTH2 ratio was considered consistent with a prevailing
type 2 immune response [35, 36]. The following cell
membrane molecules were therefore investigated using
specific fluorochrome-conjugated monoclonal antibodies:
CD3, CD4, CD8, CD19, CD16, CD56, CCR5, CRTH2/
CD294 (Miltenyi Biotec, Germany). Acquisition of data
was carried out on a BD FACSCalibur flow cytometer (BD
Biosciences); analysis of T-cell subsets was performed by
gating on total CD3+ T lymphocytes using the WinMDI
software version 2.9 (Joseph Trotter®, Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, Ca, USA).

2.3 Eosinophil Cationic Protein (ECP) and Tryptase
Serum Levels

To investigate the role of omalizumab on activated eosinophils and mast cells, their main secretion products, i.e.,
Omalizumab for Urticaria and Atopic Dermatitis

 

Fig. 1 Representative effect of omalizumab in a chronic urticaria
patient (#6). Diffuse, scattered hives (a, ¢), occurring daily in the
3 years prior to commencing omalizumab treatment. The patient had
immediate benefit following the first injection of omalizumab;
remission (b, d) was fully achieved within 2 weeks after the first
administration of omalizumab

ECP and tryptase, respectively, were measured in the
serum of patients before and during omalizumab treatment
using the ImmunoCAP® ECP and tryptase kits on a Phadia® 250 immunoassay analyser (Thermo Scientific),
according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

2.4 Omalizumab Schedule

Patients were initially treated according to the schedule
proposed for allergic asthma, i.e., based on body weight
and total serum IgE concentrations. Omalizumab dose was
increased in case of unsatisfactory response or slowly
tapered off in case of remission, as previously detailed [9].

 

 

 

 

   

 

50 5 a
a HL
ath #3
—+— #5
so HE
87
—e— 49
o 1 2 4 6 8 10 12 «16
weeks
60
severe b
ee
40
moderate 22
30 i
reas: 20
mild
10 [) remission
0 16
weeks

Fig. 2 Time course of UAS7 (a) and SCORAD index (b) following
omalizumab treatment. See text for details

2.5 Follow-Up

Patients were subjected to laboratory investigations quarterly for the first 2 years of omalizumab therapy, then every
6 months. Patients were also subjected to imaging techniques before omalizumab treatment and at least yearly
thereafter (Table 2). Clinically, the patients were evaluated
on each injection day, i.e., every 2-4 weeks, depending on
the individual administration schedule.

3 Results
3.1 Patients

Overall, six of nine patients had a complete response
(67 %), one patient had a partial response (11 %) and two
patients (22 %) did not improve at all. The rate of complete
response was 67 % both in chronic spontaneous urticaria
(four of six patients) and in atopic dermatitis (two of three
patients). In patients with chronic spontaneous urticaria,
remission was obtained within a few days up to a couple of

4 Adis
 

mS

weeks of the first drug injection, whereas atopic dermatitis
patients had a progressive improvement over several weeks
(Table 1). Specifically, chronic spontaneous urticaria
patients #1, 3, 6 rapidly achieved a complete response

4 Adis

C. Romano et al.

Fig. 3 Efficacy of omalizumab in atopic dermatitis. Patient #4:
involvement of face, neck, and flexural regions of the upper limbs,
with erythema, oedema, xerosis, excoriations, and lichenification,
before initiating treatment with omalizumab (a). Four months after
beginning omalizumab treatment, the patient had a complete response
(b). No concomitant therapy with other systemic or topical drugs
(e.g., steroids, cyclosporine, methotrexate, tacrolimus, pimecrolimus,
etc.) was associated to omalizumab in this case. Complete remission
was successfully maintained with low-dose omalizumab (150 mg
every 6-8 weeks)

(Table 1; Fig. 1); patient #5 needed shorter administration
intervals to obtain and maintain a complete response
(occurrence of episodes of hives around the end of the
30-day cycle). Two patients (#7 and #9) did not respond at
all to treatment with anti-IgE; interestingly, these two
patients had the lowest levels of circulating IgE before
starting therapy (6.3 and 21.7 kU/L, respectively, Table 1).
The time course of UAS7 in chronic spontaneous urticaria
patients is depicted in Fig. 2a. Among the atopic dermatitis
patients (#2, 4, 8), it is noteworthy that the two patients (#4
and #8) with pre-treatment circulating IgE levels within the
range of neutralisation (<1,500 kU/L, depending on body
weight) by currently available doses of omalizumab, both
obtained a complete response, with progressive improvement over several months (Table 1; Figs. 2b, 3). Moreover,
omalizumab was the only drug used for inducing and
maintaining the clinical response. Patient #2, who was on
cyclosporine and whose circulating IgE levels were well
above the maximum threshold for neutralisation
(10,208 kU/L) by the anti-IgE, could only partially benefit
from omalizumab therapy (SCORAD down from 50 to 30,
Fig. 2b). Thus, in our experience, too low or too high
circulating IgE levels appeared to meaningfully affect the
outcome of the clinical response to omalizumab.

3.2 T Cell Polarisation

Data on the effects of omalizumab on T-cell polarisation
were available for six of the nine patients. Patient #2 was
excluded from analysis because of concomitant treatment
with cyclosporine. Intriguingly, omalizumab determined a
progressive reduction in the CCR5/CRTH2 ratio in all the
examined patients, suggesting polarisation toward a type 2
immune response (Fig. 4). This novel finding adds further
complexity to the mechanism of action hypothesised for
omalizumab, making its effects even more pleiotropic than
initially predicted.

3.3 ECP and Tryptase Serum Levels

ECP serum levels were found to be more elevated in
patients with atopic dermatitis than in chronic spontaneous
urticaria patients (Fig. 5), probably reflecting a more significant role for eosinophils in the pathogenesis of atopic
Omalizumab for Urticaria and Atopic Dermatitis

 

 

Fig. 4 Effect of omalizumab on 16
T-cell polarisation. Omalizumab
was associated with a 14

decreasing CD3-++-CCR5+/
CD3+CRTH2-+ ratio,

 

12

suggesting progressive
polarization toward a type

10

—m— patient #1

 

2 immune response. This was
evident at least as early as

eee patient #3

 

4 weeks following initiation of
omalizumab treatment and was
further confirmed in the

~—®@ patient#4
4» patient#6

 

following months

= -patient#7

 

 

CD3+CCR5+/CD3+CRTH2+
©

 

 

Before

During omalizumab administration (months)

omalizumab —_—_—_—____

dermatitis with respect to chronic spontaneous urticaria.
Overall, omalizumab determined a progressive decline in
ECP serum levels, which was more pronounced in atopic
dermatitis patients (Fig. 5b), as discussed above. Consistently, dermatitis flares were paralleled by elevations in
ECP serum levels (Figure 5b). On the contrary, tryptase
serum levels (ug/L) were generally low (mean + SD
5.53 + 4.07 ug/L, median 4.58 g/L) before starting
omalizumab and did not change during treatment
(mean + SD 5.13 + 3.33 pg/L, median 4.71 pg/L, 16th
week of therapy).

 

 

 

 

 

3.4 Follow-Up and Adverse Effects

 

Mean + SD follow-up time at the time of this report was
46.8 + 23.4 months (median 42 months, range
10-78 months). No patients suffered from any type of
infection, neither helminthic and/or parasitic. Cancer
screening was negative in all patients during treatment and
follow-up. No episodes of arterial thromboembolism were
recorded. There was no induction of commonly searched
autoantibodies. All patients reported pain at the injection
site during administration.

 

4 Discussion

Our experience confirms the conceptual usefulness of
omalizumab in diseases other than asthma where the IgEmast cell axis may be hypothesised to play a significant
role. Moreover, the brilliant results obtained in patients
with chronic spontaneous urticaria implicitly demonstrate
that the IgE-mast cell axis is involved in most cases of
chronic urticaria. Of note, only the patients with total IgE

 

serum levels within the range of neutralisation with the
currently available omalizumab schedules showed progressive improvement up to clinical remission; the patient
(#2) with partial response had total IgE levels far beyond
the neutralisation capability of full dose omalizumab; on
the other hand, the worst responses in chronic spontaneous
urticaria patients were observed in those subjects whose
total IgE levels were very low (i.e., 6 and 23 kU/L,
respectively). Atopy did not seem to “help” omalizumab
do the perfect job; indeed, patient #3, who did not have
apparent specific sensitisation to common allergens, had a
good outcome; conversely, patient #9, who was atopic,
turned out to be a nonresponder. Thus, in our experience,
only pre-treatment serum total IgE levels appeared to
influence the outcome, both in chronic spontaneous urticaria and atopic dermatitis patients (Table 1). Other interesting surfaced from our experience. First,
omalizumab appeared to modify even the events upstream
the IgE-mast cell axis, as the relative ratio between
CRTH2+ and CCR5+ T lymphocytes, i.e., type 1 vs. type
2 T cells, was shown to be progressively modified by
treatment with the anti-IgE; specifically, this novel finding
suggests omalizumab-driven T-cell polarisation towards a
predominant type 2 immune response. The functional significance of this effect is not clear at the moment; if Th2/
Tc2 lymphocytes and IgE are in mutual balance, IgE
neutralisation may therefore result in an enhanced type 2
immune polarisation, similar to what is typically observed
in endocrine regulatory mechanisms [37]; alternatively, a
type 2 immune response characterised by a significant
secretion of the immunosuppressive cytokine IL-10, which
may help dampen the inflammatory response in the skin,
may be theorised to occur [38]. Finally, at least in atopic
dermatitis patients, it may be hypothesised that type 1

issues

4 Adis
C. Romano et al.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

30 a
25
2
g 20 === patient #1
2
a seeeee patient #3
= B15 :
o= = = patient#S
a 7
a. 7 i
5 10 — patient #6
KE}
ee. ’. eer tmee.
ise, aye OM esis
0
160 b
140 120
a
o
>
@ es 100 seseee patient #2
€ a
Ss B 80 === patient #4
=
a> ——— patient #8
a. 60
a
40
20

 

 

 

Before

During omalizumab administration (months)

SS

Fig. 5 Behaviour of eosinophil cationic protein (ECP) serum levels
in chronic urticaria (a) and atopic dermatitis (b) patients. In all
patients, omalizumab treatment was associated with a reduction in
ECP serum levels. Chronic urticaria patients displayed lower levels of
ECP serum levels with respect to atopic dermatitis patients before
starting treatment with omalizumab, suggesting a more significant
role for activated eosinophils in the latter dermatological condition.
This is also inferred by the observation of rising ECP levels during
episodes of dermatitis flares (asterisks patient #2). Interestingly,

immune responses progressively subside as the skin condition improves (possibly due to reduced infection-triggered immune responses, as infectious agents are known to
induce type | immune responses and to cause increased
morbidity in atopic dermatitis patients [39]). Studies
focusing on the pattern of T cell cytokine secretion are
currently ongoing in order to give a better interpretation to
the immune polarisation effect mediated by omalizumab.

Second, among the events occurring downstream the
IgE-mast cell axis, omalizumab appeared to have a role in
quenching the eosinophil-mediated inflammation. This was
particularly evident in atopic dermatitis patients, where the

4 Adis

control of dermatitis by omalizumab in patient #2 was partial and
complicated by flares, probably due to the very high pre-treatment
IgE serum levels (10,208 kU/L), suggesting incomplete neutralisation
of free circulating IgE by omalizumab. In this patient, cyclosporine
was maintained during omalizumab administration; flares were
observed during attempts at reducing cyclosporine dose. Patient #4
had the lowest ECP serum levels among atopic dermatitis patients
probably because of chronic steroid therapy continued up to the day
before starting omalizumab

clinical response was paralleled by a progressive decrease
in ECP levels, a marker of eosinophil activation; consistently, dermatitis flares were associated with elevations in
ECP serum levels. Indeed, eosinophils are just one of the
multiple players (lymphocytes, monocytes/macrophages,
Langerhans cells, keratinocytes, and mast cells) involved in
the pathogenesis of the complex inflammatory process
underlying the clinical manifestations of atopic dermatitis
[40]. Based on our results, eosinophils appear to be
important participators in the inflamed skin of atopic dermatitis patients. With due differences, our observations are
in accordance with the findings described by Djukanovic
Omalizumab for Urticaria and Atopic Dermatitis

et al. [41] and Riccio et al. [42], who reported a reduced
eosinophil infiltration in the bronchial mucosa of allergic
asthma patients following institution of omalizumab
treatment. Moreover, with regard to chronic urticaria, our
data appear to confirm the pathogenic role of eosinophils
hypothesised by Asero et al. [43]. Although tryptase serum
levels appeared unmodified in all patients treated with
omalizumab, this finding does not belittle the role of mast
cells as effector cells. Indeed, among the numerous medical
conditions characterised by mast cell degranulation, high
tryptase serum levels can generally be found only in cases
of massive degranulation (anaphylaxis) or secondary to an
expanded mast cell burden (mastocytosis) [44]. Thus,
tryptase serum levels cannot be used to monitor mast cell
activity and response to omalizumab both in chronic
spontaneous urticaria and atopic dermatitis.

Third, most responder patients were maintained in
complete remission with low-dose omalizumab, i.e., using
suboptimal doses for fully effective total IgE neutralisation.
These patients, although free from clinical manifestations,
still displayed the in vivo mast cell response, suggesting
availability of sufficient mast cell-bound IgE amenable to
cross-linking by allergens on exposure (personal observations and [9]). These observations indicate that at least
some of the positive effects exerted by omalizumab may be
independent of circulating IgE neutralisation. The fact that
our patients could be maintained in long-term remission
with low-dose omalizumab may also have advantageous
economic implications; in other words, the cost for maintaining these patients in remission may even turn out to be
lower than the direct and indirect costs imposed on the
national health agencies and governments by these ailments [45, 46], especially with the expected abatement of
the costs of the monoclonal antibodies with time.

Finally, the optimal safety profile of omalizumab is to be
emphasised; the feared complications—infection (particularly, parasitic and helminthic), cancer, autoimmunity
induction, and/or thrombosis/vascular accidents were not
observed during our long-term follow-up, with pain at the
injection site being the sole complaint reported by all patients.

5 Conclusions

Omalizumab was safe and effective both in chronic spontaneous urticaria and atopic dermatitis. In our experience,
pre-treatment serum IgE levels appeared to affect the
outcome of the clinical response, with too high or too low
concentrations associated with incomplete or no responses,
respectively. Omalizumab appeared to exert novel immunologic effects, both upstream (T-cell polarisation toward a
type 2 immune response) and downstream (blunting of
eosinophil-mediated inflammation) the IgE-mast cell axis.

In addition, at least some of the beneficial effects induced
by omalizumab may be independent of circulating IgE
neutralisation. The possibility of maintaining the clinical
response with very low doses of omalizumab may eventually turn out to be cost-effective, especially with the
expected abatement of the costs of the monoclonal antibodies with time.

Conflict of interest No sources of funding were used for the conduct of this study. The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.

References

1. Humbert N, Beasley R, Ayres J, Slavin R, Hébert J, Bousquet J,
et al. Benefits of omalizumab as add-on therapy in patients with
severe persistent asthma who are inadequately controlled despite
best available therapy (GINA 2002 step 4 treatment): INNOVATE. Allergy. 2005;60:309-16.

2. Chang TW, Wu PC, Hsu CL, Hung AF. Anti-IgE antibodies for
the treatment of IgE-mediated allergic diseases. Adv Immunol.
2007;93:63-119.

3. Chang TW, Shiung YY. Anti-[gE as a mast cell-stabilizing
therapeutic agent. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2006;117:1203-13.

4. Brozek JL, Bousquet J, Baena-Cagnani CE, Bonini S, Canonica
GW, Casale TB, et al. Allergic Rhinitis and its Impact on Asthma
(ARIA) guidelines: 2010 revision. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2010;126:466-76.

5. Tsabouri S, Tseretopoulou X, Priftis K, Ntzani EE. Omalizumab
for the treatment of inadequately controlled allergic rhinitis: a
systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials.
J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2014;2:332-40.

6. Spector SL, Tan RA. Effect of omalizumab on patients with
chronic urticaria. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2007;99:190-3.

7. Spector SL, Tan RA. Therapeutic alternatives for chronic urticaria: additional reports on omalizumab. Ann Allergy Asthma
Immunol. 2008;101:647.

8. Vestergaard C, Deleuran M. Two cases of severe refractory
chronic idiopathic urticaria treated with omalizumab. Acta Derm
Venereol. 2010;90:443-4.

9. Romano C, Sellitto A, De Fanis U, Esposito G, Arbo P, Giunta R,
Lucivero G. Maintenance of remission with low-dose omalizumab in long-lasting, refractory chronic urticaria. Ann Allergy
Asthma Immunol. 2010;104:95—7.

10. Iemoli E, Piconi S, Fusi A, Borgonovo L, Borelli M, Trabattoni
D. Immunological effects of omalizumab in chronic urticaria: a
case report. J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol. 2010;20:252—4.

11. Kaplan AP, Joseph K, Maykut RJ, Geba GP, Zeldin RK. Treatment of chronic autoimmune urticaria with omalizumab.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2008;122:569-73.

12. Ferrer M, Gamboa P, Sanz ML, Goikoetxea MJ, Cabrera-Freitag
P, Javaloyes G, et al. Omalizumab is effective in nonautoimmune
urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011;127:1300-2.

13. Saini S, Rosen KE, Hsieh HJ, Wong DA, Conner E, Kaplan A,
et al. A randomized, placebo-controlled, dose-ranging study of
single-dose omalizumab in patients with H1-antihistaminerefractory chronic idiopathic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2011;128:567-73.

14. Maurer M, Altrichter S, Bieber T, Biedermann T, Brautigam M,
Seyfried S, et al. Efficacy and safety of omalizumab in patients
with chronic urticaria who exhibit IgE against thyroperoxidase.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011;128:202-9.

4 Adis
15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22)

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

Maurer M, Rosen K, Hsieh HJ, Saini S, Grattan C, GimenezArnau A, et al. Omalizumab for the treatment of chronic idiopathic or spontaneous urticaria. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:924—35.
Kaplan A, Ledford D, Ashby M, Canvin J, Zazzali JL, Conner E,
et al. Omalizumab in patients with symptomatic chronic idiopathic/spontaneous urticariadespite standard combination therapy. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013;132:101-9.

Saavedra MC, Sur S. Down regulation of the high-affinity IgE
receptor associated with successful treatment of chronic idiopathic urticaria with omalizumab. Clin Mol Allergy. 2011;9:2.
Asai K, Kitaura J, Kawakami Y, Yamagata N, Tsai M, Carbone
DP, et al. Regulation of mast cell survival by IgE. Immunity.
2001;14:791-800.

Kalesnikoff J, Huber M, Lam V, Damen JE, Zhang J, Siraganian
RP, et al. Monomeric IgE stimulates signaling pathways in mast
cells that lead to cytokine production and cell survival. Immunity.
2001;14:801-11.

Altrichter S, Peter HJ, Pisarevskaja D, Metz M, Martus P, Maurer
M. IgE mediated autoallergy against thyroid peroxidase—a novel
pathomechanism of chronic spontaneous urticaria? PLoS One.
2011;6:e14794.

Hatada Y, Kashiwakura J, Hayama K, Fujisawa D, Sasaki-Sakamoto T, Terui T, et al. Significantly high levels of anti-dsDNA
immunoglobulin E in sera and the ability of dsDNA to induce the
degranulation of basophils from chronic urticaria patients. Int
Arch Allergy Immunol. 2013;161(suppl 2):154-8.

Chang TW, Chen C, Lin C-J, Metz M, Church MK, Maurer M.
The potential pharmacologic mechanisms of omalizumab in
patients with chronic spontaneous urticaria. J Allergy Clin
Immunol. 2014. doi:10.1016/j.jaci.2014.04.036.

 

. Morjaria JB, Polosa R. Off-label use of omalizumab in non
asthma conditions: new opportunities. Expert Rev Respir Med.
2009;3:299-308.

Incorvaia C, Mauro M, Russello M, Formigoni C, Riario-Sforza
GG, Ridolo E. Omalizumab, an anti-immunoglobulin E antibody:
state of the art. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2014;8:197-207.
Zuberbier T, Aberer W, Asero R, Bindslev-Jensen C, Brzoza Z,
Canonica GW, et al. The EAACI/GA(2) LEN/EDF/WAO
guideline for the definition, classification, diagnosis, and management of urticaria: the 2013 revision and update. Allergy.
2014;69:868-87.

Eichenfield LF, Tom WL, Chamlin SL, Feldman SR, Hanifin JM,
Simpson EL, et al. Guidelines of care for the management of
atopic dermatitis: section 1. Diagnosis and assessment of atopic
dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2014;70:338-51.

Jauregui I, Ortiz de Frutos FJ, Ferrer M, Giménez-Arnau A,
Sastre J, Bartra J, et al. Assessment of severity and quality of life
in chronic urticaria. J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol. 2014;24:
80-6.

Romano C, De Fanis U, Sellitto A, Chiurazzi F, Guastafierro S,
Giunta R, et al. Induction of CD95 upregulation does not render
chronic lymphocytic leukemia B-cells susceptible to CD95mediated apoptosis. Immunol Lett. 2005;97:131-9.

Sellitto A, Galizia G, De Fanis U, Lieto E, Zamboli A, Orditura
M, et al. Behavior of circulating CD4+-CD25+Foxp3+ regulatory T cells in colon cancer patients undergoing surgery. J Clin
Immunol. 2011;31:1095-104.

Loetscher P, Uguccioni M, Bordoli L, Baggiolini M, Moser B,
Chizzolini C, et al. CCRS is characteristic of Thl lymphocytes.
Nature. 1998;391:344—5.

4 Adis

32.

33.

40.

Al.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

C. Romano et al.

. Qin S, Rottman JB, Myers P, Kassam N, Weinblatt M, Loetscher

M, et al. The chemokine receptors CXCR3 and CCR5 mark
subsets of T cells associated with certain inflammatory reactions.
J Clin Invest. 1998;101:746-54.

Nagata K, Tanaka K, Ogawa K, Kemmotsu K, Imai T, Yoshie O,
et al. Selective expression of a novel surface molecule by human
Th2 cells in vivo. J Immunol. 1999;162:1278-86.

Cosmi L, Annunziato F, Iwasaki M, Galli G, Manetti R, Maggi E,
et al. CRTH2 is the most reliable marker for the detection of
circulating human type 2 Th and type 2 T cytotoxic cells in health
and disease. Eur J Immunol. 2000;30:2972-9.

. De Fanis U, Mori F, Kurnat RJ, Lee WK, Bova M, Adkinson NF,

et al. GATA3 up-regulation associated with surface expression of
CD294/CRTH2: a unique feature of human Th cells. Blood.
2007;109:4343-50.

. Boin F, De Fanis U, Bartlett SJ, Wigley FM, Rosen A, Casolaro

V. T cell polarization identifies distinct clinical phenotypes in
scleroderma lung disease. Arthritis Rheum. 2008;58:1165-74.

. De Fanis U, Wang GC, Fedarko NS, Walston JD, Casolaro V,

Leng SX. T-lymphocytes expressing CC chemokine receptor-5
are increased in frail older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2008;56:
904-8.

. Onoé K, Yanagawa Y, Minami K, Iijima N, Iwabuchi K. Th1 or

Th2 balance regulated by interaction between dendritic cells and
NKT cells. Immunol Res. 2007;38:319-32.

. Iyengar SR, Hoyte EG, Loza A, Bonaccorso S, Chiang D, Umetsu

DT, Nadeau KC. Immunologic effects of omalizumab in children
with severe refractory atopic dermatitis: a randomized, placebocontrolled clinical trial. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2013;162:
89-93.

. Baker BS. The role of microorganisms in atopic dermatitis. Clin

Exp Immunol. 2006;144:1-9.

Furuta GT, Atkins FD, Lee NA, Lee JJ. Changing roles of
eosinophils in health and disease. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol.
2014;113:3-8.

Djukanovic R, Wilson SJ, Kraft M, Jarjour NN, Steel M, Chung
KF, et al. Effects of treatment with anti-immunoglobulin E
antibody omalizumab on airway inflammation in allergic asthma.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2004;170:583-93.

Riccio AM, Dal Negro RW, Micheletto C, De Ferrari L, Folli C,
Chiappori A, Canonica GW. Omalizumab modulates bronchial
reticular basement membrane thickness and eosinophil infiltration
in severe persistent allergic asthma patients. Int J Immunopathol
Pharmacol. 2012;25:475-84.

Asero R, Cugno M, Tedeschi A. Eosinophils in chronic urticaria:
supporting or leading actors? World Allergy Organ J. 2009;2:
213-7.

Schwartz LB. Diagnostic value of tryptase in anaphylaxis and
mastocytosis. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am. 2006;26:45 1-63.
Delong LK, Culler SD, Saini SS, Beck LA, Chen SC. Annual
direct and indirect health care costs of chronic idiopathic urticaria: a cost analysis of 50 nonimmunosuppressed patients. Arch
Dermatol. 2008;144:35-9.

Fowler JF, Duh MS, Rovba L, Buteau S, Pinheiro L, Lobo F,
et al. The direct and indirect cost burden of atopic dermatitis: an
employer-payer perspective. Manag Care Interface. 2007;20:
26-32.
