Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol xxx (2015) 1-4

 

   

ELSEVIER

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 

 

Outcomes of using omalizumab for more than 1 year in refractory

chronic urticaria

Daniel Har, MD; Saurin Patel, MD; and David A. Khan, MD

University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas

 

ARTICLE INFO

ABSTRACT

 

Article history:

Received for publication March 9, 2015.
Received in revised form April 22, 2015.
Accepted for publication May 16, 2015.

Background: Because omalizumab was only recently approved for refractory chronic urticaria (CU), there
are few studies that have evaluated patients using omalizumab for longer than 1 year.
Objective: To evaluate omalizumab’s effectiveness, its feasibility in weaning, and its safety profile in patients
with refractory CU who were on omalizumab for longer than 1 year.
Methods: A retrospective chart review was conducted of adults with well-defined refractory CU in the
authors’ clinic from October 2005 to January 2015 who responded to omalizumab and who had taken it for
longer than 1 year. In addition to baseline characteristics, the duration, course, and adverse effects of
omalizumab therapy were analyzed.
Results: Eight of 10 patients had complete resolution of symptoms after reaching their optimal regimen and
had taken omalizumab for a median duration of 37 months (17—112 months). None of them required uptitration of dosage, an increase in frequency of dosage, or add-on therapy. Five of 8 patients, while being tapered,
had recurrence of symptoms requiring the reuse of omalizumab. One successfully discontinued omalizumab, 1
was in the process of being weaned but did not experience a flare, and 1 had not attempted weaning.
Conclusion: This study from the United States suggests that omalizumab is effective and safe in patients
with refractory CU who use omalizumab for longer than 1 year. Periodic attempts at weaning patients with
CU from omalizumab should be attempted because there could be a chance of spontaneous remission. This
might be difficult because symptoms are likely to recur, but restarting omalizumab in these patients seems
effective and safe.

© 2015 American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

 

Introduction

Chronic urticaria (CU) is a disease in which urticarial lesions
recur or last longer than 6 weeks. CU is associated with significant
morbidity to patients and has a significant impact on their quality
of life, including loss of sleep and lack of energy. First-line medical
therapy for CU is typically H; antagonists coupled with avoidance of
any aggravating factors. The European Academy of Allergy and
Clinical Immunology guidelines recommend increasing the dose of
second-generation antihistamines up to 4-fold if standard doses are
not effective. According to the 2014 practice parameters on urticaria, patients with CU whose symptoms are not adequately
controlled on such high-dose antihistamine therapy could be
defined as having refractory CU. These patients often rely on systemic corticosteroid therapy. However, given the associated
comorbidities of prolonged corticosteroid use, long-term use

Reprints: Daniel Har, MD, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323
Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390-8859; E-mail: Daniel.Har@Phhs.org.
Disclosures: Dr Khan served as speaker for Genentech, Merck, Baxter, and ViroPharma; received support from the Vanberg Family Fund; and was a member of the
Joint Task Force Practice Parameter.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.anai.2015.05.010

should be avoided. Other alternative therapies include dapsone,
sulfasalazine, hydroxychloroquine, colchicine, cyclosporine, tacrolimus, and mycophenolate.' In March 2014, the Food and Drug
Administration approved omalizumab as a new treatment for refractory CU. It works in patients with many types of CU, including
those with IgE autoantibodies against thyroperoxidase, cholinergic,
cold, and autoimmune urticaria.2~>

Because omalizumab was only recently approved, the long-term
effectiveness of this medication has been studied only by small case
reports from other countries. In addition, because omalizumab is
very expensive, it would be helpful to know whether or when patients can discontinue this medication because there is no current
consensus regarding duration of CU treatment with omalizumab.
Moreover, there is sparse literature regarding the adverse effects of
long-term omalizumab use. Therefore, the aim of this study was to
analyze all these characteristics in patients with refractory CU who
had taken omalizumab for longer than 1 year.

 

Methods

A retrospective chart review was conducted of adults with refractory CU in the authors’ clinic from October 2005 to January 2015

1081-1206/© 2015 American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
2 D. Har et al. / Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol xxx (2015) 1-4

Table 1
Baseline patient characteristics

 

 

Patient Sex Age Steroid use Length IgE History of Failed antihistamines Failed alternative treatments

number (y) of CU (y) (kU/L) angioedema

1 M 43 PDNdaily(20mg) 2 96 yes cetirizine, fexofenadine, ranitidine, doxepin, dapsone, hydroxychloroquine, tacrolimus,
diphenhydramine mycophenolate

2 M_ 60 _ PDN bursts 15 73 yes fexofenadine, desloratadine, cetirizine, montelukast, azathioprine, IVIG, mycophenolate
doxepin, diphenhydramine

3 M 59 PDNqod(15mg) 22 618 no doxepin, hydroxyzine, fexofenadine hydroxychloroquine, tacrolimus, mycophenolate,

colchicine

4 F 40 PDN bursts 3 87 no hydroxyzine, doxepin, cetirizine dapsone, tacrolimus, sulfasalazine

5 F 50 PDN bursts 5) 2,762 yes doxepin, fexofenadine, hydroxyzine, dapsone, montelukast
levocetirizine, famotidine

6 M = 28 _ PDN bursts 8 412 no cetirizine, diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine, | mycophenolate, tacrolimus, dapsone, triamcinolone
fexofenadine

a M_ 40 PDN bursts 1 10 no R-Tanna, fexofenadine, diphenhydramine, —_ azathioprine, mycophenolate
cetirizine, hydroxyzine

8 F 20 PDN bursts 1 94 no hydroxyzine, diphenhydramine, cetirizine, | mycophenolate
doxepin, fexofenadine, levocetirizine

i) F 45 PDN bursts 1 10 no cetirizine, desloratadine, doxepin hydroxychloroquine, tacrolimus, UV therapy

10 F 57 _-PDN bursts 13 9 no cetirizine, loratadine tacrolimus, doxepin, cyclosporine

 

Abbreviations: CU, chronic urticaria; F, female; IVIG, intravenous immunoglobulin; M, male; PDN, prednisone; qod, every other day; UV, ultraviolet.

who responded to omalizumab and took the medication for longer
than 1 year. Patients with CU whose symptoms were not
adequately controlled on high-dose antihistamines (eg, >4-fold the
standard dose of second-generation antihistamines or >100 mg/
day of hydroxyzine or doxepin) were considered to have refractory
CU. In addition, alternative treatment had failed in each patient.

Baseline characteristics, including sex, age, duration of CU
symptoms, IgE value, regular (defined as daily or every other day)
steroid use, history of angioedema, failed antihistamines, and failed
alternative medications, were collected before the inception of
omalizumab use.

Patients were categorized as complete responders or partial
responders. Complete responders were patients who had resolution of their urticaria and did not require a medication other than
omalizumab to control their lesions. Partial responders were patients who had improvement in their urticaria but not absence of
these lesions. Of note, responses were evaluated starting from the
most recent effective dose and dose interval; the concept that dose
intervals should be individualized is new.°

First, the long-term effectiveness of omalizumab was examined.
Long-term effectiveness was defined as complete responders not
requiring uptitration of omalizumab or add-on therapy for symptom recurrence after being on omalizumab for longer than 1 year. In
other words, of the complete responders, did their effective omalizumab dose alone, excluding attempts to wean, continue to successfully control their symptoms for at least 1 year?

Second, each patient’s attempt or lack of attempt to taper
omalizumab was analyzed. More specifically, the authors assessed
how many of the complete responders never attempted to taper
down omalizumab, how many were tapering without symptom
recurrence, how many were tapering but had symptom recurrence
and therefore kept on the previous dosage and frequency, and how
many could successfully discontinue omalizumab.

Third, the authors focused on the long-term adverse effects of
omalizumab use. Supplementary data, including duration of omalizumab and whether patients were currently using omalizumab,
also were reviewed.

All patients received approval through their respective insurance companies for off-label use of omalizumab in CU. The study’s
omalizumab dosing was empirically based on the asthma nomogram, because data from randomized controlled trials using various
doses had not been published. This nomogram uses a patient’s
pretreatment serum total IgE level and body weight to calculate
dosing. This study was approved by the institutional review board

 

 

at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center (Dallas).
The requirement to obtain informed consent was waived in
accordance with 45 CFR 46.116(d).

Results

From 2005 to 2015, 17 patients with refractory CU were placed
on a trial of omalizumab. Ten patients responded and 7 did not. Of
note, baseline characteristics were not compared between these 2
groups because of the lack of statistical power. Thus, these 10 patients (5 female and 5 male) were included in this study. Their
baseline characteristics are listed in Table 1. At the inception of
omalizumab use, the median age was 44 years and the median
length of CU was 4 years. Although all patients responded to oral
prednisone, efforts were attempted to avoid prolonged courses.
Therefore, 8 of 10 patients were on prednisone bursts before
starting omalizumab, whereas 2 patients required regular steroid
use. The median IgE level was 91 kU/L (9—2,762 kU/L). Three of 10
patients had a history of angioedema.

With regard to long-term effectiveness, after reaching an
effective omalizumab regimen and excluding attempts at tapering,
all complete responders (n = 8) remained in resolution for longer
than 1 year without requiring uptitration of dosage, an increase in
frequency of dosage, or add-on therapy.

Figure 1 portrays the titration attempts of the complete responders and Table 2 presents additional details regarding each
patient. Overall, 7 of 8 complete responders experienced a flare
when omalizumab was given less frequently than needed. One of 8
complete responders did not attempt to taper (patient 8). She is
currently scheduled for a dose every 2 weeks. However, when she
misses a dose, her symptoms return. Tapering might be attempted
in the near future. One patient did not experience any flares (patient 9). Another patient successfully discontinued his omalizumab
(patient 7). However, many months later, he experienced a small
flare, which was well controlled with antihistamines only. The
remaining 5 complete responders (patients 2—6) tried tapering
from omalizumab and experienced recurrence of symptoms when
switched to a longer frequency of administration. These 5 patients
restarted their previous omalizumab regimen and experienced
complete resolution without any adverse effects. For these patients,
symptoms reoccurred from weeks 4 through 10.

There were 2 of 10 patients who were not considered complete
responders. One patient (patient 1) was a partial responder and is
attempting a higher dose until he reaches complete resolution

 
D. Har et al. / Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol xxx (2015) 1-4 3

  
  

fle;
=
“Y% recurrence | il h

“Hi=
Z il

symptom
= Tapering with symptom °::.:::

 
   

 
  
 
 
      
 
 

 

recurrence

   

Figure 1. Omalizumab tapering in complete responders (n = 8).

(from 150 to 300 to 450 mg). Another patient (patient 10) had
symptoms controlled for 4 years using cyclosporine. However,
owing to concerns of long-term cyclosporine toxicity, she was
started on omalizumab and successfully tapered off cyclosporine.
She never experienced any flares or adverse effects.

The median duration of omalizumab use for all patients was
27 months (17—112 months; Table 2). Seven of the 8 patients had
resolution after the first injection of their effective regimen,
whereas 1 patient required 3 injections before having complete
resolution (patient 7). Currently, 8 of 10 patients are still using
omalizumab. As stated earlier, 1 patient discontinued his omalizumab because he was judged to be in remission (patient 7).
Another patient’s insurance company denied her further omalizumab injections (patient 4). In consequence, she attempted
using mycophenolate, sirolimus, and immunoglobulin. Importantly, throughout this entire trial, no adverse reactions were
noted.

 

Discussion

This retrospective study demonstrates that omalizumab maintains long-term effectiveness in patients with refractory CU, even as
long as 112 months. Because omalizumab was recently approved,
few articles have focused on the long-term characteristics of omalizumab in CU.’* Silva et al,’ from Portugal, studied 7 patients taking
omalizumab for a median of 35 months and similarly demonstrated
long-term efficacy and safety. However, none of their patients achieved control without omalizumab. Conversely, the present study
demonstrated 1 patient with complete remission (patient 7) who did
not need to restart omalizumab. Another article, by Song et al,® from
Canada, also stated that omalizumab remains efficacious in the long
term. However, they did not define “long term” or clarify how long
each patient was followed. Moreover, their patients continued
treatment on an as-needed basis, which does not elucidate whether
patients had future flares. Conversely, the present patients were
systematically weaned and kept on the previous regimen if weaning
was unsuccessful to prevent another flare.

Seven of the 8 complete responders had recurrence of symptoms when the omalizumab frequency was decreased and 6 of
these 7 required omalizumab again; these data suggest that omalizumab rarely induces remission without maintenance treatment.
This conclusion is supported by 3 large phase 3 trials, which
demonstrated that after stopping omalizumab, improvements in 7day urticaria activity score returned to values similar to placebo
values by week 40.” |! Although the present study demonstrates
the difficulty of discontinuing omalizumab even after years of
therapy, retreatment with omalizumab was effective and safe. The
authors’ conclusion parallels that of another report that focused on
this concept as the primary outcome.'*

It is important to note that 1 of 10 patients in the present study
did not need maintenance treatment after omalizumab was discontinued (patient 7), which correlates with other studies that have
suggested a potential for remission.*:'*'* Whether these few patients underwent remission or whether this was due to the natural
disease process is unknown. Perhaps, just as omalizumab needs to
be uniquely titrated to an effective dosing regimen, it also might
require individualized tapering.

The present study also demonstrates that omalizumab has a
good long-term safety profile. Because of its long-term effectiveness and safety profile, and if cost is not a significant barrier, one
could even consider switching patients from their current alternative medication to omalizumab. This novel idea succeeded in 1
patient who was initially on cyclosporine (patient 10).

 

 

Table 2
Long-term omalizumab course
Patient Duration of Response to omalizumab Omalizumab dosage and frequency Recurrence Current status of Medications used Adverse
number omalizumab (mo) omalizumab use after omalizumab reaction
1 26 partial 150 mg q4 — 300 mg q4 — 450 mg 4 not available still taking not required none
2 112 complete (after first injection) 300 mg q4 — 150 mg q4 — q6 yes—at q8 still taking not required none
3 74 complete (after first injection) 375 mg q2 — q4 — q6 — q8 yes—at q10 still taking not required none
4 28 complete (after first injection) 300 mg q4 yes—at q6 discontinued” mycophenolate, none
sirolimus, SCIG
5 80 complete (after first injection) 450 mg q2 yes—at q4 still taking not required none
6 45 complete (after first injection) 375 mg q4 yes—at q6 still taking not required none
Es 17) complete (after third injection) 150 mg q4 — q6 —> q8 yes—a few months discontinued* prn antihistamines none
after discontinuation
8 24 complete (after titration 150 mg q4 — 300 mg q4 — q2 yes—at q4 still taking not required none
to 300 mg q2)
9 20 complete (after first injection) 150 mg q4 — q6 — q8 — q10 no still taking not required none
10 12 remained in resolution* 300 mg q4 — q6 no still taking not required none

 

Abbreviations: prn, add needed; q2, dose every 2 weeks; q4, dose every 4 weeks; q6, dose every 6 weeks; q8, dose every 8 weeks; q10, dose every 10 weeks; SCIG, sub
cutaneous immunoglobulin.

*Weaned off cyclosporine without flare.

bOmalizumab was discontinued secondary to lack of insurance coverage.
“Secondary to complete remission.
4 D. Har et al. / Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol xxx (2015) 1-4

The main limitation in this study is that the sample is relatively
small (n = 10), limiting its power and potentially its generalizability.
However, the subset of patients who are truly refractory in the
general population is relatively small. In addition, obtaining approval
by insurance companies for off-label use of omalizumab was difficult
for some of these patients. Because omalizumab has been approved
by the Food and Drug Administration, multicenter studies are
needed to investigate the long-term effects of this medication.

In conclusion, this study from the United States is consistent
with other international reports, suggesting that omalizumab is
effective and safe in patients with refractory CU who use omalizumab for longer than 1 year. Considering how omalizumab is an
expensive medication, patients on omalizumab should try to be
weaned off because there is a chance of spontaneous remission.
However, this could be difficult to do because symptoms are likely
to recur. Physicians should be reassured that restarting omalizumab
in these patients seems safe and effective. As more patients start
taking omalizumab, larger prospective studies with a similar severe
refractory population are warranted to help confirm the results of
this small retrospective study.

References

[1] Morgan M, Khan DA. Therapeutic alternatives for chronic urticaria: an
evidence-based review, part 1. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2008;100:
403-411,

[2] Maurer M, Altrichter S, Bieber T, et al. Efficacy and safety of omalizumab in
patients with chronic urticaria who exhibit IgE against thyroperoxidase.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011;128:202—209.e5.

 

[10)

{1

[12

[13

[14]

 

Metz M, Bergmann P, Zuberbier T, Marurer M. Successful treatment of
cholinergic urticaria with anti-immunoglobulin E therapy. Allergy. 2008;63:
247-249.

Boyce JA. Successful treatment of cold induced urticaria/anaphylaxis with
anti-IgE. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2006;117:1415—1418.

Kaplan AP, Joseph K, Maykut RJ, Geba GP, Zeldin RK. Treatment of chronic
autoimmune urticaria with omalizumab. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2008;122:
569-573.

Uysal P, Eller E, Mortz CG, Bindslev-Jensen C. An algorithm for treating
chronic urticaria with omalizumab: dose interval should be individualized.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2014;133:914—915.

Silva PM, Costa AC, Mendes A, Barbosa MP. Long-term efficacy of omalizumab
in seven patients with treatment-resistant chronic spontaneous urticaria.
Allergol Immunopathol (Madr). 2015;43:168—173.

Song CH, Stern S, Giruparajah M, Berlin N, Sussman GL. Long-term efficacy of
fixed-dose omalizumab for patients with severe chronic spontaneous urticaria. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2013;110:113—117.

Saini SS, Bindslev-Jensen C, Maurer M, et al. Efficacy and safety of omalizumab
in patients with chronic idiopathic/spontaneous urticaria who remain
symptomatic on H1 antihistamines: a randomized, placebo-controlled study.
J Invest Dermatol. 2015;135:925.

Saini S, Rosen KE, Hsieh HJ, et al. A randomized, placebo-controlled, doseranging study of single-dose omalizumab in patients with H1-antihistamine—refractory chronic idiopathic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2011;128:567—573.

Maurer M, Rosén K, Hsieh H, et al. Omalizumab for the treatment of chronic
idiopathic or spontaneous urticaria. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:924—935.

Metz M, Ohanyan T, Church MK, Maurer M. Retreatment with omalizumab
results in rapid remission in chronic spontaneous and inducible urticaria.
JAMA Dermatol. 2014;150:288—290.

Groffik A, Mitzel-Kaoukhov H, Magerl M, Maurer M, Staubach P. Omalizumab—an effective and safe treatment of therapy resistant chronic spontaneous urticaria. Allergy. 2011;66:303—305.

Asero R, Casalone R, Iemoli E. Extraordinary response to omalizumab in a
child with severe chronic urticaria. Eur Ann Allergy Clin Immunol. 2014;46:
41-42.
