INVESTIGATION

 

vV
Correlation between the histopathology of chronic urticaria and its
clinical picture”

Roberta Fachini Jardim Criado!
Juliana Milhomem Tamanini!

Raquel Zappa Silva Marques!

Carlos D’Apparecida Santos Machado Filho’
Cristina van Blarcum de Graaff Mello’
Carolina Speyer’

DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/abd1806-4841.20165066

 

Abstract: Backcrounp:Chronic urticaria is characterized by transient, pruritic lesions of varying sizes, with central pallor
and well-defined edges, with disease duration longer than six weeks. Its cellular infiltrate consists of neutrophils, lymphocytes and eosinophils. There is a subgroup of patients with eosinophilic or neutrophilic urticaria, resistant to the treatment
with antihistamines, but that respond to a combination of antihistamine with other drugs.

Osjective: To evaluate the present infiltration in chronic urticaria biopsies and correlate it with the clinical disease activity
and response to treatment.

Metuoos: Forty-one patients with chronic urticaria were classified according to the score of severity of the disease, response
to treatment and type of perivascular infiltrate. Inflammatory infiltrates were divided in eosinophilic (46.30%), neutrophilic

and mixed.

Resutts: An association was found between the eosinophilic infiltrate and clinical scores of greater severity (p = 0.002).
Conc usion: This association shows that the eosinophilic inflammatory infiltrates denote high clinical activity, which means

more severe and exuberant clinical pictures of the disease.
Keywords: Biomarkers; Chronic disease; Urticaria

INTRODUCTION

Urticaria is one of the most commonly conditions observed
in dermatology daily practice, affecting 15% to 30% of the population.’ Wheal is its elementary dermatological lesion, characterized
by being itchy and have central edema with varied size, surrounded
by a reflex erythema and with ephemeral nature; furthermore, the
skin returns to its normal aspect usually in a period that varies from
one to 24 hours.” Urticaria is classified, from the point of view of
duration of its evolution, in acute (less than six weeks) or chronic
(over six weeks).

The physiopathology of chronic urticaria (CU) has long
been associated with anxiety and allergy to foods or its additives,
but today it is considered the participation of autoimmune mechanisms and coagulation factors.‘ It is known that degranulation of
mast cells or skin basophils is its initial stimulation. By releasing potent vasoactive mediators, vasodilation is induced, increasing capillary permeability and resulting in erythema and papule formation.’

Received on 21.08.2015
Approved by the Advisory Board and accepted for publication on 16.12.2015

The main vasoactive mediator involved in CU is histamine,
however there are other mediators such as arachidonic acid metabolites, leukotrienes (LTC4, D4 and E4), prostaglandin D2, serotonin,
acetylcholine, platelet-activating factor, heparin, codeine, anaphylatoxins C3 and C5a, cytokines and neurotransmitters released from
cutaneous nerve endings.* These mediators participate in attracting
other inflammatory cells such as neutrophils, lymphocytes, and
particularly eosinophils, which play a role in inflammation maintenance for release of other substances, characterizing the cellular
infiltrate of the disease.°

Inflammatory infiltrates composed of neutrophils, eosinophils and their products - macrophages and helper T lymphocytes
- have been described in cholinergic CU lesions and pressure urticaria. Increased vascular markers, eosinophils and neutrophils is a
feature of damaged skin in CU, contributing to tissue edema.®” Also
the increased Th2 cytokine expression in CU lesions suggests that
the innate pathways may operate in the formation of these lesions

Study conducted at Dermatology Outpatient Clinic of Faculdade de Medicina do ABC (FMABC) - Santo André (SP), Brazil.

Financial Support: None.
Conflict of Interest: None.

‘Faculdade de Medicina do ABC (FMABC) - Santo André (SP), Brazil.

©2016 by Anais Brasileiros de Dermatologia

An Bras Dermatol. 2016;91(6):760-3
Correlation between the histopathology of chronic urticaria and its clinical picture 761

by participating in mast cell activation, inflammation and the formation of vascular leakage.*

In addition, patients with CU often show signs of thrombin
generation, as a result of the extrinsic pathway activation of coagulation and fibrinolysis, and have mean levels of D-dimer slightly
higher, being a participant substance of this pathway.*

The clinical importance of characterizing the inflammatory
infiltrate resides in the presence of a subgroup of patients presenting
eosinophil or neutrophil urticaria, which may be resistant to treatment with antihistamines, but which responds to a combination of
antihistamine with other drugs.® In addition to the improvement
and optimization of the treatment of disease, to establish a relation
between inflammatory infiltrate and clinical score of severity of the
disease can also aid in the prognosis of the disease and therefore in
its management.

The aim of this study is to evaluate the inflammatory infiltrate present in CU biopsies and correlate it with the clinical activity

of the disease and its response to treatment.

METHODS

This is a cross-sectional, descriptive study of clinical basis.
We selected 273 patients from the urticaria clinic of the Department
of Dermatology of the Faculdade de Medicina do ABC, who were
on routine outpatient treatment from January 2009 to May 2014. We
excluded 229 patients without biopsy and three with biopsy compatible with urticarial vasculitis.

Our final sample consisted of 41 patients who underwent
biopsy at some point in their treatment. The medical records of these
patients were analyzed by a standard form containing the urticaria
activity score (UAS)' and the biopsy report. The survey data was
carried out by signing an informed consent by the patient during
his/her routine consultations in the urticaria clinic.

To meet the inclusion criteria, patients had to: 1) come from
the urticaria clinic; 2) present or have presented the disease for a period longer than six weeks; 3) be older than 18 years; 4) understand
and sign the informed consent form; and 5) have undergone biopsy
at some time of the disease.

Exclusion criteria were: 1) duration of urticaria shorter than
six weeks; 2) failure to sign the informed consent form; 3) absence
of biopsy of the lesions; and 4) age younger than 18 years. Patients
with CU were classified according to UAS, which is determined
by the number of daily urticaria and the intensity of pruritus,’ as
shown in table 1. Clinical score is considered mild when UAS is
from 0 to 2 points; moderate, when it is from 3 or 4 points; and high,

when it is from 5 to 6 points.

Taste 1; Urticaria intensity assessment

 

 

SCORE WHEAL ITCH

0 None None

1 Mild (less than 20 wheals in 24 hours) Mild

2 Moderate (21 to 50 wheals in 24 hours) Moderate
3 High (more than 50 wheals in 24 hours or _ Intense

large confluent areas of wheals)

 

Sum of scores (wheal + itch) = (0-6)
Adapted from Darlenski et al!

The biopsy material was fixed in formalin 10% and stained
with hematoxylin and eosin (HE) and subjected to microscopy at
magnification of 400 times. The degree of perivascular infiltrate
was considered as neutrophilic when the number of neutrophils
was greater than or equal to seven out of 10 cells of the infiltrate;
eosinophilic, when the number of eosinophils was greater than or
equal to seven out of 10 cells of the infiltrate; and mixed, when there
was no predominance of cells among monocytes, neutrophils and
eosinophils.

CU treatment was performed with antihistamines and
therapeutic monitoring, aiming to observe the degree of difficulty
in controlling the disease. For patients with poor response (use of
four or more doses of antihistmine per day) adjuvant treatment was
used (cyclosporin, dapsone, montelukast, colchicine, chloroquine
and corticosteroids).

Response to treatment was determined according to the
number of daily doses of drugs in the control of urticaria. Response
score was thus established: a dose of antihistamines - good answer;
two or three doses - moderate response; and four or more doses poor response. The criteria used for this control was the absence of

urticaria or angioedema for 30 days, under the established treatment.

Statistical analysis

The variable type of inflammatory infiltrate, PCR, D-dimer,
clinical activity score and therapeutic response, for being categorical, were expressed in absolute and relative frequencies. Since the
data were not normally distributed (Shapiro-Wilk test, p<0.05), IgE
was expressed as medians and confidence intervals. To analyze the
association between types of inflammatory infiltrates, inflammatory
activity outcomes and response to therapy, we used the chi-square
test. To analyze differences in IgE concentrations between the types
of inflammatory infiltrates, we used the Kruskal-Wallis test. The significance level adopted was 95%. The software used was Stata 11.0.

RESULTS

We selected 41 adult patients with biopsy at some time of
treatment, 85.4% woman and 14.6% man. Inflammatory infiltrates
were divided between eosinophilic, neutrophilic and mixed, and
46.30% represented the eosinophilic inflammatory infiltrate.

The type of inflammatory infiltrate observed in biopsies had
no association with the value of IgE (Shapiro-Wilk test), but eosinophilic infiltrate was the one that presented higher median (value of
286). There was also no statistical significance between the D-dimer
values and PCR and the type of inflammatory infiltrate (p = 0.709
and p = 0.508 respectively).

An association between eosinophilic infiltrate and clinical
scores of greater severity (p = 0.002) was observed, as can be seen in
table 2. There was no statistically significant association between the
type of infiltrate and the therapeutic response (p = 0.535).

DISCUSSION

Our study showed a higher percentage of female patients,
which is in accordance with the demographic profile of the disease
that is already known, but the proportion found was 5.84 women
for one man, while in literature the proportion is 2:1.° The type and

An Bras Dermatol. 2016;91(6):760-3
762 Marques RZS, Criado RFJ, Machado Filho CDS, Tamanini JM, Mello CVBG, Speyer C

Taste 2: Correlation between type of infiltrate and inflammatory

activity tests, clinical score and therapeutic response

 

 

 

Activity Inflammatory infiltrate — n (%) p*
Inflammatory Eosinophilic Neutrophilic Mixed
activity
CRP 0.508
Less than 6 12 (66.7) 6 (60) 5 (45.5)
Higher than 6 6 (33.3) 4 (40) 6 (54.5)
D-Dimer 0.709
Less than 0.5 2 (22.7) 1 (12.5) 2 (28.6)
Higher than0.5 —_ 10 (83.3) 7 (87.5) 5 (71.4)
Clinical activity 0.002
Mild 2 (10.5) 0 4 (36.3)
Moderate 2 (10.5) 6 (75) 4 (36.3)
High 15 (79) 2 (25) 3 (27.4)
Therapeutic response 0.535
Good response _5 (26.32) 1 (10) 2 (28.57)
Moderate response 7 (36.84) 5 (50) 5 (57.14)
Poor response 7 (36.84) 4 (40) 1 (14.29)

 

* Probabilistic value of chi-square test with significance level of 95%; CRP: C-reactive protein

intensity of the inflammatory infiltrate seen by biopsy of the lesions
were quite variable and depended on the time when the biopsy was
performed and on the etiology of the lesions. It is common the presence of edema in the reticular dermis, and the cellular infiltrate may
have a predominance of neutrophils, eosinophils or both, featuring
its histological type.”

In our study, an association between the inflammatory infiltrate and the clinical score of the disease was demonstrated: eosinophilic type showed high clinical activity, i.e., more serious and exuberant clinical pictures of the disease, while neutrophilic and mixed
infiltrate types manifested clinically in a mildest form." The tissue
factor expressed by eosinophils induces the activation of blood clotting and thrombin generation, which, in turn, can increase vascular
permeability, both directly, acting on endothelial cells, and indirect
ly, inducing mast cell degranulation by the release of histamine.’

An Bras Dermatol. 2016;91(6):760-3

Thus, the association found in this study between the clinical score
of greater severity and eosinophil infiltrate shows that, when the
eosinophil predominates, there is more than an activation pathway
of the disease - the direct and also the indirect - reinforcing its development and aggravating its clinical picture.

In our study, the relation between the type of infiltrate and
response to treatment wasn’t identified. Urticaria presents a wide
range of etiologies, and its onset comes from different cellular activation orders. Thus, the therapeutic response is very variable and
susceptible to idiosyncrasies, because each patient has a trigger
mechanism of the disease.

In our study, no statistical significance between the values of
IgE and the types of inflammatory infiltrate was found, but the median IgE in eosinophilic infiltrate presented higher than in the other
infiltrates. IgE is produced by plasma cells, has a short mean life and
receptors in various inflammatory cells, among them mast cells and
basophils, which have specific Fc receptors." Mast cells are potent inflammatory cells that express on their surface receptors able to start,
expand and perpetuate inflammatory processes by releasing soluble
factors and that interact with other immune effector cells."

In our study, no relation between D-dimer and inflammatory infiltrate was evidenced, although there is in the literature a relation between disease severity and high plasma levels of D-dimer.*
Also, relation between values of CRP and infiltrate was not identi
fied, but this is a unspecific marker of systemic inflammation.”

CONCLUSION

In our study, we found significant statistical relation between the type of inflammatory infiltrate, characterized in histopathological analysis of biopsies, and clinical score of disease
severity, according to Zuberbier criteria:' eosinophilic infiltrates
presented relation with more severe clinical manifestations of the
disease, while neutrophilic infiltrates showed a relation with milder
clinical pictures.

Relation between the findings of biopsies and response to
treatment of urticaria was not demonstrated. Also, the study didn’t
find significant statistical relation between the infiltrate and CRP,
D-dimer and IgE variables.O
Correlation between the histopathology of chronic urticaria and its clinical picture 763

REFERENCES

Darlenski R, Kazandjieva J, Zuberbier T, Tsankov N. Chronic urticaria as a systemic
disease. Clin Dermatol. 2014;32:420-3.

Grzanka A, Machura E, Mazur B, Misiolek M, Jochem J, Kasperski J, et al.
Relationship between vitamin D status and the inflammatory state in patients with
chronic spontaneous urticaria. J Inflamm (Lond). 2014;11:2.

Confino-Cohen R, Chodick G, Shalev V, Leshno M, Kimhi 0, Goldberg A. Chronic
urticaria and autoimmunity: associations found in a large population study. J
Allergy Clin Immunol. 2012;129:1307-13.

Asero R, Tedeschi A, Riboldi P Griffini S, Bonanni E, Cugno M. Severe chronic
urticaria is associated with elevated plasma levels of D-dimer. Allergy.
2008;63:176-80.

Criado PR, Antinori LC, Maruta CW, Reis VM. Evaluation of D-dimer serum levels
among patients with chronic urticaria, psoriasis and urticarial vasculitis . An Bras
Dermatol. 2013;88:355-60.

Criado RF, Criado PR, Martins JE, Valente NY, Michalany NS, Vasconcellos C.
Urticaria unresponsive to antihistaminic treatment: An open study of therapeutic
options based on histopathologic features. J Dermatolog Treat. 2008;19:92-6.
Kay AB, Ying S, Ardelean E, Mlynek A, Kita H, Clark P et al. Elevations in vascular
markers and eosinophils in chronic spontaneous urticarial weals with low-level
persistence in uninvolved skin. Br J Dermatol. 2014;171:505-11.

Kay AB, Clark P Maurer M, Ying S. Elevations in T-helper-2-initiating cytokines
(interleukin-33, interleukin-25 and thymic stromal lymphopoi- etin) in lesional skin
from chronic spontaneous (‘idiopathic’) urticaria. Br J Dermatol. 2015;172:1294302.

Greaves MW, Sabroe RA. Allergy and the skin. |-Urticaria. BMJ. 1998;316:114750.

Herrera E, Moreno A, Requena L, Rodriguez JL. Dermatopatologia: correlacion
clinico-patologica. Barcelona: Grupo Menarini; 2007.

Black AK, Greaves MW. Urticaria and Angioedema. In: Kay AB, editor. Allergy and
allergic diseases. Oxford: Blackwell Science Ltda; 1997. p. 1586-607.

Ramon GD, Ojeda E, Ramon CG. Angioedema y urticaria asociadas con infeccién
activa del virus de Epstein-Barr en un adulto. Arch Argent Alerg Inmunol Clin,
2000;31:94-8.

Tedeschi A, Kolkhir P Asero R, Pogorelov D, Olisova 0, Kochergin N, et al. Chronic
urticaria and coagulation: pathophysiological and clinical aspects. Allergy.
2014;69:683-91.

MAILING ADDRESS:

Raquel Zappa Silva Marques

Av. Principe de Gales, 821

Vila Principe de Gales

09060-650 - Santo André -SP
Brazil

Email: Raquelzappa@hotmail.com

How to cite this article: Marques RZS, Criado RFJ, Machado Filho CDS, Tamanini JM, Mello CVBG, Speyer
C. Correlation between the histopathology of chronic urticaria and its clinical picture. An Bras Dermatol.
2016;91(6):760-3.

An Bras Dermatol. 2016;91(6):760-3
