Original Article

 

The Comparative Safety of Multiple Alternative
Agents in Refractory Chronic Urticaria Patients

 

Sharon Seth, MD, and David A. Khan, MD Dallas, Texas

What is already known about this topic? Certain alternative agents such as omalizumab and cyclosporine have been
studied with reported safety profiles at doses used in chronic urticaria. Safety of other agents has been reported, but toa

lesser degree.

What does this article add to our knowledge? The use of alternative agents in chronic urticaria is generally safe with

proper laboratory and clinical monitoring.

How does this study impact current management guidelines? This study further adds to the body of literature supporting the relatively low risk of alternative agents used for chronic urticaria in patients who have failed treatment with
steps 1 through 3 as recommended by the current Urticaria Practice Parameters.

BACKGROUND: Patients who have failed traditional treatment
of chronic urticaria may require trials of alternative medications.
Safety profiles, continuous laboratory monitoring, and physician
comfort are often barriers to treatment.

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the safety of alternative agents used
in chronic urticaria.

METHODS: A retrospective chart review of electronic medical
records from a single-center allergy and immunology clinic in a
major academic hospital was conducted. One hundred twentysix charts of patients with chronic urticaria treated with alternative agents were reviewed.

RESULTS: Adverse effects were reported in 39 of 73 (53%)
patients on dapsone, 19 of 47 (40%) patients on sulfasalazine, 15
of 36 (42%) patients on tacrolimus, 7 of 45 (16%) patients on
hydroxychloroquine, 9 of 27 (33%) patients on mycophenolate,
6 of 8 (75%) patients on cyclosporine, and 3 of 24 (4%) patients
on omalizumab. Most of these adverse effects were mild, did not
require discontinuation of the medication, and resolved after
stopping the medication or decreasing the dose.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of alternative agents for the
treatment of chronic urticaria angioedema is generally safe

Division of Allergy and Immunology, University of Texas Southwestern Dallas,
Dallas, Texas

The Vanberg Family Foundation supported this study.

Conflicts of interest: $. Deol’s institution has received money from the Vanberg
Family Foundation. S. Deol has received compensation from the Texas Regional
Asthma and Allergy Center as employee after completing her fellowship.
D. A. Khan has received a grant from the Vanberg Family Foundation, speaker’s
honoraria from Genentech, and compensation from Aimmune as a Data Safety
Monitoring Board member.

Received for publication February 29, 2016; revised July 22, 2016; accepted for
publication August 23, 2016.

Available online il

Corresponding author: Sharon Seth, MD, Texas Regional Asthma and Allergy
Center, 900 E Southlake Blvd, Suite 300, Southlake, TX 76092. E-mail:
sharonjd111@gmail.com.

  

2213-2198
© 2016 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jaip.2016.08.010

 

when proper laboratory and clinical monitoring is
observed. © 2016 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma &
Immunology (J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 2016;m:m-m)

Key words: Chronic urticaria; Angioedema; Alternative agents;
Dapsone; Sulfasalazine; Hydroxychloroquine; Tacrolimus;
Mycophenolate

Continuous or intermittent urticaria for a period of at least 6
weeks is termed chronic urticaria (CU).' Patients with CU
incompletely managed on high-dose antihistamines who have
failed step 3 therapy as defined by the 2014 Urticaria Practice
Parameters are often referred to as suffering from refractory urticaria.' Although these patients may benefit symptomatically from
systemic steroid use, their long-term use is not recommended
because of the adverse effects (AEs) of long-term use.' There are
multiple alternative agents for patients with refractory urticaria
with varying degrees of evidence. Practitioners tend to shy away
from these lesser-used medications for numerous reasons such as
physician knowledge, prescribing comfort, patient comorbidities,
frequent laboratory monitoring, and concern for safety. Although
many studies have focused on the effectiveness of specific alternative agents, there is little information on the comparative safety
of multiple alternative agents with refractory CU. Therefore, we
sought to review our experience with alternative agents in a population of patients with refractory CU focusing on both subjective
and objective AEs.

 

 

METHODS

With institutional review board approval, electronic medical records from a single provider practicing allergy and immunology at
the University of Texas Medical Center were queried for all patients
treated with dapsone, sulfasalazine, methotrexate, colchicine, cyclosporine, tacrolimus, mycophenolate, omalizumab, and intravenous
immunoglobulin from January 1, 2001, to April 22, 2014. Two
hundred seventeen charts were retrospectively reviewed. One hundred twenty-six patients were found to meet inclusion criteria, which
included physician-diagnosed CU, treatment with an alternative
2 SETH AND KHAN

Abbreviations used
AE- Adverse effect
CIU- Chronic idiopathic urticaria

CU- Chronic urticaria
GI- Gastrointestinal
WBC- White blood cell

 

agent for CU, and 18 years or older at the time of treatment with an
alternative agent. Exclusion criteria included charts lacking sufficient
documentation of follow-up and treatment with an alternative agent
for indications other than CU.

Charts were reviewed for demographic information, maximally
achieved dose of alternative agent, duration of medication at any
dose, response to therapy, steroid dependency and ability to discontinue or decrease steroid dose, patient-reported AEs, physiciannoted AEs, dose adjustments, and laboratory abnormalities. Steroid
dependency was defined as daily oral steroids, or frequent recurrent
oral steroid courses for at least 3 months. For patients initiated on
alternative agents, blood pressure, dosing, baseline laboratories such
as complete blood cell counts, basic metabolic panels, urinalysis,
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, and monitoring laboratories as

 

appropriate were obtained as in accordance with the Practice Pace i 2,3
rameters and additional literature.»

RESULTS

A review of 217 patient charts revealed 126 patients who met
inclusion criteria. Demographics data are reported in Table | for
the 126 patients. Twenty-five patients were treated with more
than 1 alternative agent at a time. Different combinations used are
listed in Table El in this article’s Online Repository at www. jaciinpractice.org. Patients with concurrent urticarial vasculitis and
physical urticarias were included. Average dose, duration and AEs
for the most common alternative agents are shown in Table II.

Dapsone

Seventy-three patients were treated with dapsone a total of 84
times. A total of 39 patients reported AEs. The most common AE
was a predictable asymptomatic drop in hemoglobin level, defined
by a drop of at least 5% from baseline. The average decrease in
hemoglobin level was 19.2% (range, 9.61%-31.0%). Two patients experienced dyspnea on exertion from drops in hemoglobin
level. Other AEs are reported in Table E2 in this article’s Online
Repository at www.jaci-inpractice.org. Six patients required dose
adjustments with resolution of AEs. Dapsone was discontinued
secondary to AEs in 4 patients, either by the patient or by the
clinician. The most common AEs and reasons for discontinuation
of dapsone and each proceeding medication are listed in Table III.
Two patients had presumed methemoglobinemia based on dyspnea, palpitations, and nausea despite methemoglobin levels of
less than 20%; this was considered a serious AE.

Sulfasalazine

Forty-seven patients were treated with a total of 51 courses of
sulfasalazine. Nineteen patients reported AEs as described in
Table E3 in this article’s Online Repository at www. jaciinpractice.org. Two patients required dose adjustments with
resolution of their AE. Eight patients (17%) discontinued secondary to AEs of sulfasalazine, most commonly gastrointestinal
(GI) disturbances. No serious AEs were reported.

J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL PRACT
MONTH 2016

TABLE |. Demographic characteristics of 126 patients with CU
treated with alternative agents

 

 

Characteristic Value

Mean age (y) (n = 126) 44 (18-69)

Sex (n = 126) 77% females, 23% males
Mean duration (range) of urticaria (mo) 44 (2-444)

Steroid dependent 78 patients (61%)

Able to stop or decrease oral steroids while 58 patients (74%)
treated with an alternative agent

Chronic urticaria 102 patients

Urticarial vasculitis 6 patients
Physical urticarias* 28 patients
Other urticarias+ 1 patient

 

*Delayed pressure urticaria (16 patients), symptomatic dermatographism
(9 patients), cholinergic urticaria (1 patient), cold urticaria (1 patient), solar urticaria
(1 patient).

+Autoimmune progesterone urticaria (1 patient).

Hydroxychloroquine

Hydroxychloroquine was used 51 times in 45 patients. Seven
reported AEs are reported in Table £4 in this article’s Online
Repository at www.jaci-inpractice.org. Three patients (6.7%)
discontinued hydroxychloroquine secondary to AEs. There was
no clear predominant AE with hydroxychloroquine and no
serious AEs were reported.

Tacrolimus

Forty-four trials of tacrolimus were used in 36 patients.
Twenty-one patients experienced AEs as reported in Table E5 in
this article’s Online Repository at www.jaci-inpractice.org. Six
patients (17%) discontinued the dose secondary to AEs. Two
patients required dose adjustments with resolution of their AE.
Four patients had elevation in their creatinine level by less than
0.5 mg/dL; all were reversible after discontinuation of tacrolimus. Tacrolimus was discontinued in 1 patient with elevated
blood pressure. Elevated creatinine and elevated blood pressure
were both considered serious AEs.

Mycophenolate

Twenty-seven patients were treated with mycophenolate 29
times. Nine patients reported AEs as listed in Table E6 in this
article’s Online Repository at www.jaci-inpractice.org, and 2
(7%) patients discontinued secondary to AEs. There was no clear
predominant AE with mycophenolate. Leukopenia was considered a serious AE.

Cyclosporine

Eight patients were treated with 11 courses of cyclosporine.
Six of 8 (75%) patients experienced AEs as outlined in Table E7
in this article’s Online Repository at www.jaci-inpractice.org.
Three patients required dose adjustments; however, no patient
discontinued the therapy secondary to AEs, and no serious AEs
were reported.

Omalizumab

Twenty-four patients were treated with 26 courses of omalizumab. No one discontinued therapy secondary to AEs. One
patient reported mild flushing on the first dose only; 1 reported
hair loss. One patient reported flushing and right upper chest
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL PRACT
VOLUME Mf, NUMBER

SETH AND KHAN 3

TABLE Il. The average highest dose of each alternative agent as well as the total duration of treatment with the alternative agent at any

dose

  

Medic: Average highest dose = Average duration (mo)
Dapsone 102.7 mg 7.6 (0.25-72)
Sulfasalazine 23g 4.8 (0.25-53)
Hydroxychloroquine 402.0 mg 3 (0.25-96)
Tacrolimus 4.1 mg 7.6 (0.25-52)
Mycophenolate 2555 8 (0.25-62)
Omalizumab 300 mg every 4 wk* 15 (2-70)
Cyclosporine 272.7 mgt 3 (2-53)

NA, Not applicable/available.

Patients AEs Discontinuation due to AE Serious AE
i} 53.4% (n= 39) 5.5% (n= 4) 2.7% (n = 2)
47 40% (n = 19) 17% (n = 8) NA
45 16% (n = 7) 6.7% (n = 3) NA
36 42% (n = 15) 1.7% (n = 5) 1% (n = 6)
27 31% (n= 9) 7.4% (n = 2) 3.7% (n = 1)
24 13% (n = 3) NA NA

8 75% (n = 6) NA NA

*Omalizumab regimens varied. Most patients received 300 mg every 4 wk. Other regimens included 150 mg every 4 wk and 375 mg every 2 wk.

+Starting dose usually ~3 mg/kg/d.

TABLE Ill. The most common AEs and reasons for discontinuation of the most commonly used agents

Medication (no. of patients treated)

Dapsone (73)

Sulfasalazine (47)

Hydroxychloroquine (45)

GI symptoms

Tacrolimus (36)

Mycophenolate (27)

Omalizumab (24)
Cyclosporine (8)

Mild flushing (rare)
GI symptoms

*Medication not discontinued.

TABLE IV. AEs experienced on other alterative agents as well as
discontinuation rates

 

Medic: Patients AEs Discontinued

Colchicine 4 Diarrhea (n = 1) 0

Sirolimus 3 Lower extremity 0
swelling (n = 1)

Intravenous 3 None 0

immunoglobulin

Methotrexate 2 GI upset (n = 1) 1

Etanercept 1 Injection site reaction 0
(a= 1)

Stanozolol 1 None 0

Heparin 1 None 0

pain 40 minutes after omalizumab dose, which resolved with
observation alone. No serious AEs were reported.

Other alternative agents
Other alternative agents were used, though to a lesser extent
than the aforementioned agents. AEs are outlined in Table IV.

Most common AEs

Asymptomatic drop in hemoglobin level

GI symptoms and headaches

GI symptoms and headaches

GI symptoms and headaches

Reason for discontinuation (no. of patients)

Symptomatic methemoglobinemia (2)
Racing heart (1)
Paresthesias (1)

GI symptoms (6)

Flu-like symptoms (1)

Drop in WBC count (1)

GI symptoms (1)

Pruritus and rash (1)
Headaches (1)

GI symptoms (1)
Headaches (2)

Rise in creatinine level (1)
Increased blood pressure (1)
Leukopenia (1)

Irritability (1)

Efficacy. The efficacy of the major alternative agents is reported in Table V. It is possible that some of the “Complete
control” patients also achieved remission. Many of the patients
were given a plan for discontinuation of the alternative agent
upon their last visit and instructed to return if symptoms
recurred.

DISCUSSION

After reviewing the charts of 126 patients who have failed
traditional treatment of chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU), the
comparative safety of multiple alternative agents has been
reviewed (Figure 1). A single provider was selected for review
because he used alternative agents more than 95% of the time
and was the primary referral for patients with refractory CU.
Specialists such as dermatologists and other allergists referred
many of these patients. Often, these patients had been to more
than 1 specialist and had tried an alternative agent in the past.
This conglomerate of refractory patients accounts for the multiple trials of alternative agents used in this clinical practice.
Although other authors have examined the use of many alternative agents in the treatment of patients with CU, this is the
4 SETH AND KHAN J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL PRACT

MONTH 2016

TABLE V. Efficacy of alternative agents

 

       

Failed Partial Partial control Complete control
Dapsone 2 11 tt 3 13) 8
Sulfasalazine 10 19 14 2; 3 2:
Hydroxychloroquine 7 21 3) 2 6 6
Tacrolimus 2 11 7 3 13 8
Mycophenolate 4 9 5 1 6 4
Omalizumab 0 6 5 2, 13 0
Cyclosporine 0 1 3 1 1 5

 

“Insufficient duration” indicates that the patient or the provider discontinued the medication before an effective length of treatment. “Failed” indicates that the patient was on the
medication for an effective length of time, but did not have any clinical benefit. “Partial” indicates that the patient had some relief from symptoms, but the alternative agent was
changed because of lack of enough clinical benefit. “Partial control” indicates that the patient was not 100% symptom free, but was having adequate benefit and continued on the

alternative agent with decrease or discontinuation in other medications or steroids.
alternative agent with discontinuation of other medications or steroids.
the alternative agent and all other medications.

 

 

largest series focusing on the comparative safety of alternative
agents reported to our knowledge.

Dapsone

As has been previously reported with dapsone therapy, the
most common AE experienced by patients was a predictable drop
in hemoglobin level. In most patients, this drop was asymptomatic and did not result in a discontinuation or a decreased
dose of dapsone therapy. Five patients’ doses were decreased for
asymptomatic anemia. Two patients’ doses were decreased for
exertional dyspnea during intense physical activity with
improvement of symptoms after dose decrease. Two patients
experienced symptoms such as nausea, dyspnea, and palpitations
concerning for methemoglobinemia. Although methemoglobin
levels were less than 20%, symptoms were concerning enough to
continue dapsone avoidance. Both patients’ symptoms resolved
after stopping therapy. The patient with a “racing heart” did not
have a drop in hemoglobin level or any other symptoms
consistent with methemoglobinemia. On further review of the
medical records, we found that this patient continued to experience a racing heart months after the discontinuation of
dapsone, leading us to believe that this was unrelated. The 2
patients who developed thrombocytopenia on dapsone therapy
were taking 200 mg dapsone daily at the time of presentation to
our clinic. The thrombocytopenia resolved with decreased doses
of dapsone. This side effect was not seen in any patient on 100
mg or less of dapsone daily. No patients had hemolysis while on
dapsone, another known hematologic side effect of dapsone
therapy. The hematologic AEs of dapsone therapy are more
pronounced in patients with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
deficiency, and thus all patients were screened for this genetic
deficiency before initiation with dapsone therapy.’ No patients
with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency were treated
with dapsone therapy. The patient who experienced paresthesias
on dapsone also experienced paresthesias with cyclosporine
therapy, as well as other nonspecific symptoms with other
alternative agents. Monitoring for hepatotoxicity is also recommended in patients on chronic dapsone therapy.”’” Four patients
experienced transient and mild increases in transaminases, but
did not require dose adjustments before resolution. Two patients
were concomitantly taking acetaminophen above the recommended dose at the time of transaminase elevation, and this
was thought to be the primary etiology of the elevated transaminase. A previous double-blind placebo-controlled study of 22

 

 

 

 

“Complete control” indicates that the patient was 100% symptom free and continued on the
emission” indicates that the patient was 100% symptom free for at least 3 mo after discontinuation of

patients with refractory CIU on dapsone therapy did not find any
serious AE.*

Sulfasalazine

GI symptoms and headaches were the most commonly reported AEs of patients taking sulfasalazine. This is concurrent
with other non-CIU studies reporting on the safety of sulfasalazine.” A 2006 sulfasalazine CIU study reported a similar AE
profile in 37% of patients and no patient discontinued because of
AE." In our study, 6 patients discontinued sulfasalazine secondary to GI adverse effects. Aminosalicylates such as sulfasalazine are also known to cause bone marrow toxicity.° In a study
with similar patient characteristics, 19.4% of patients required
modification of their dosages secondary to hematologic AEs and
1 patient required discontinuation due to leukopenia.'' In our
study, 2 patients experienced drops in total white blood cell
(WBC) counts. One patient had a mild leukopenia (WBC count
of 3500/ LL while on sulfasalazine 3 g daily). This was monitored
and remained stable while the patient continued therapy. The
other patient had leukopenia (WBC count of 2900/[IL from a
baseline of 6500/1L while on 2 g sulfasalazine daily). Sulfasalazine was discontinued in this patient by the provider with return
of her WBC count to normal levels. One patient self
discontinued sulfasalazine for flu-like symptoms while taking
1 g twice a day. He had initially tolerated 500 mg twice for
1 week before increasing his dose. Symptoms resolved over the
few days following discontinuation of the medication, and sulfasalazine was not tried again because of patient preference. Flulike symptoms are not a commonly reported side effect from this
medication and further details of patient’s symptoms are not
known. The aforementioned study with similar patient characteristics required discontinuation of a second patient due to
thabdomyolysis.'' The patient in our study did not specifically
describe symptoms consistent with rhabdomyolysis.

 

 

 

 

Hydroxychloroquine

Two patients reported ocular side effects while on hydroxychloroquine. One patient reporting “blurry vision” was evaluated
by ophthalmology and found to have a refractive error and was
provided new eyeglasses. This was not thought to be attributable
to the hydroxychloroquine. The other patient described
“floaters,” which were occurring along with daily headaches. The
headaches and ocular symptoms resolved after discontinuation of
therapy. No patients were thought to have retinal toxicity from
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL PRACT
VOLUME Mf, NUMBER

 

80

™ Patients treated

    

70

 

60 Reported AEs

 

50 Discontinued secondary to AEs

40

 

30

 

20

 

10

 

 

 

p Fr

xe » age
»é oP ao wi

oe om os?
ys

 

G Rd

FIGURE 1. Frequency of adverse effects and need for discontinuation of alternative agents for CU.

hydroxychloroquine, a known and serious side effect of
hydroxychloroquine.'” Baseline ophthalmologic examinations
were recommended within the first year of use in those who
remained on hydroxychloroquine in accordance with the most
recently revised recommendations by the American Academy of
Ophthalmology.'* Patients thought to be high risk for retinopathy were generally not started on this therapy. GI symptoms
were infrequent in patients, though they are the most commonly
reported side effects of hydroxychloroquine.”'* Only 1 patient
discontinued because of nausea and diarrhea. One patient selfdiscontinued after noting pruritus, the most common cutaneous adverse effect of hydroxychloroquine,'“ on day 1 of the
medication and small itchy bumps on day 4. She again attempted
to take the medication, but noted pruritus again and the medication was discontinued. The rash resolved before evaluation by
the treating physician.

 

 

Tacrolimus

GI symptoms, increased creatinine level, increased blood
pressure, and neurologic symptoms are some of the most common symptoms experienced by patients on oral tacrolimus.'”’'°
One patient discontinued secondary to GI side effects. Four
patients had mild increases in creatinine level while on tacrolimus. All patients were observed, and 3 patients returned to their
baseline creatinine level after completion of tacrolimus therapy.
One patient went from a baseline creatinine level of 1.06 mg/dL
to a creatinine level of 1.30 mg/dL while on a total of 6 mg daily.
The tacrolimus level was 8.8 ng/mL, and the provider discontinued tacrolimus. The creatinine level remained elevated to a
maximum value of 1.39 mg/dL despite discontinuation of
tacrolimus. This patient was referred to nephrology, and upon
further review of past medical records, this patient’s initial baseline creatinine level obtained in clinic was found to be lower than
it had been in previous years. It was unlikely that tacrolimus
caused any long-term increase in creatinine level and the patient
had no further renal complications. Headache, another
commonly reported side effect of tacrolimus, was reported in 5
patients and required discontinuation in 2 patients. '° One patient required discontinuation of tacrolimus because of difficult
to control blood pressure. This was thought to be more likely
secondary to the underlying uncontrolled hypertension rather

 

 

SETH AND KHAN 5

than the tacrolimus because it continued to fluctuate during
subsequent visits. Nonetheless, tacrolimus was discontinued in
this patient, and in general was not started in patients with
known uncontrolled hypertension. Although paresthesias is
generally considered a common side effect of tacrolimus, only 2
patients experienced this, and in 1 it was thought to be more
likely secondary to comorbidities of diabetes because it seemed to
be present both before and after tacrolimus use. The other patient
had resolution of paresthesias after discontinuation of tacrolimus.

Mycophenolate mofetil

More common AEs of mycophenolate include GI, genitourinary, neurologic, and hematologic symptoms. "In the
reviewed patients, the most commonly reported symptoms were
GI symptoms, which is in line with previous reports in patients
with CU.'® One patient discontinued the medication after 1
week after stating that he had increased irritability at home. The
medication was discontinued for a second patient by the emergency room for WBC count of 3800/[LL and absolute lymphocyte count of 800/mL in the setting of abdominal pain. The
workup was negative in the emergency room and the patient was
subsequently sent home. Given no perceived benefit from the
medication, it was not restarted.

Omalizumab

Three of 24 patients reported AEs on omalizumab; however,
no patient discontinued secondary to AEs. One patient reported
hair loss, which was not appreciated by the provider. One patient
experienced mild flushing after the first injection only, and not
on subsequent injections. The third patient experienced right
upper chest pain and mild facial flushing 40 minutes after one of
his injections. This was observed and resolved without treatment.

Cyclosporine

Six of 8 patients (75%) on cyclosporine reported AEs, the
highest percentage of any alternative agent. Three patients required
a decrease in their dose secondary to AEs; however, no patient
discontinued secondary to AEs. One patient necessitated a decrease
in dose due to a rise in creatinine level after starting pravastatin,
which led to increased cyclosporine levels. The creatinine level
normalized with a decreased dose. One patient decreased the dose
secondary to paresthesias, and 1 patient secondary to abdominal
discomfort as well as paresthesias. The safety of cyclosporine has
been variable in previous studies from as low as 0% reported AE in
a mostly pediatric population to as high as a 16.5% discontinuation rate due to unacceptable AEs in a more comparable population to this study. 1920 The later study reported GI AEs, peripheral
neuropathy, and headaches as the most common AEs.””

Other alternative agents and combination therapy

AEs were experienced by 33% of patients on sirolimus
(n = 3), 50% on methotrexate (n = 2), and by a single patient
on etanercept (n = 1). No AEs were reported by patients on
intravenous immunoglobulin, stanozolol, or heparin. Combination therapy did not result in an increased incidence of AEs as
compared with monotherapy.

Efficacy. Sixty-one percent (78 patients) of the 126 patients
were steroid dependent before starting an alternative agent.
Seventy-four percent (58 patients) were able to either decrease or
stop systemic steroids while being treated with an alternative agent.
Limited efficacy data were collected during the chart review and are
6 SETH AND KHAN

reported in Table V. Patients with “Partial control,” “Complete
control,” and “Remission” were able to decrease or discontinue
systemic steroids if they were steroid dependent. It is possible that
some of the “Complete control” patients also achieved remission.
Many of the patients were given a plan for discontinuation of the
alternative agent on their last visit and instructed to return if
symptoms recurred.

CONCLUSIONS

After the completion of this retrospective chart review of patients with refractory CU treated with alterative agents, it is the
authors’ opinion that treatment with these agents is generally
safe. Although relatively low risk, the use of alternative agents
must always be weighed against their benefit. Although the body
of literature on the efficacy of these agents is less than robust,
there will be times in clinical practice that alternative agents are
the next best step for the patient. It is again noted that all patients included in this review were refractory to standard treatment, many were steroid dependent, and many had failed other
alternative agents under other providers. It is the authors’
opinion that these are the patients who should be considered for
alternative agents after a thorough discussion of the risks and
benefits. Proper laboratory as well as clinical monitoring is
required with the use of these alternative agents, even at the doses
used in CU. The limitations of this study include its retrospective
design. A unique strength of this study is the ability to review
AEs in a “real-life” clinical setting. Patients were sometimes
inconsistent with laboratory and clinical monitoring, and limited
quantities of refills were provided pending laboratory results and
proper follow-up. Many patients communicated via electronic
medical records messaging and reported AEs in this manner.
Often, these patients could not be evaluated in a timely manner
because of their distance from the academic center. Despite these
“real-life” issues, serious AEs were rare and no patient experienced permanent complications when treated with an alternative
agent at the doses recommended in CU.

 

REFERENCES
1. Bernstein JA, Lang DM, Khan DA, Craig T, Dreyfus D, Hsieh F, et al. The
diagnosis and management of acute and chronic urticaria: 2014 update.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;133:1270-7.
2. Morgan M, Khan DA. Therapeutic altematives for chronic urticaria: an evidencebased review, part 1. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2008;100:403-1 1. quiz 12-4, 68.

  

20.

. Al-Bari MA. Chloroquine analogues in drug discovery: new directions of us.

. Garritsen FM, Roekevisch E,

. Varghese J,

J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL PRACT
MONTH 2016

. Morgan M, Khan DA. Therapeutic alternatives for chronic urticaria: an

evidence-based review, part 2. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2008;100:517-26.
quiz 26-8, 44.

. Amin P, Levin L, Holmes SJ, Picard J, Bernstein JA. Investigation of patient
specific characteristics associated with treatment outcomes for chronic urti. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 2015;3:400-7.

 

     

. Orion E, Matz H, Wolf R. The life-threatening complications of dermatologic

  

3:182.

 

therapies. Clin Dermatol 2005

. Wolverton SE, Remlinger K. Suggested guidelines for patient monitoring: he
patic and hematologic toxicity attributable to systemic dermatologic drugs.
Dermatol Clin 2007;25:195-205. vi-ii.

. Khan DA, Alternative agents in refractory chronic urticaria: evidence and

considerations on their selection and use. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 2013;1
433-440.e1.

. Morgan M, Cooke A, Rogers L, Adams-Huet B, Khan DA. Double-blind

placebo-controlled trial of dapsone in antihistamine refractory chronic idiopathic
urticaria, J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 2014;2:601-6.

. Braun J, van der Horst-Bruinsma IE, Huang F, Burgos-Vargas R, Vlahos B,

Koenig AS, et al. Clinical efficacy and safety of etanercept versus sulfasalazine
in patients with ankylosing spondylitis: a randomized, double-blind trial.
Arthritis Rheum 2011;63:1543-51.

 

. McGirt LY, Vasagar K, Gober LM, Saini SS, Beck LA. Successful treatment of

recalcitrant chronic idiopathic urticaria with sulfasalazine. Arch Dermatol 2006;
142:1337-42.

. Orden RA, Timble H, Saini SS. Efficacy and safety of sulfasalazine in patients

with chronic idiopathic urticaria. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2014;112:
64-70.

. Marmor MF, Comparison of screening procedures in hydroxychloroquine

toxicity. Arch Ophthalmol 2012;130:461-9.

. Marmor MF, Kellner U, Lai TY, Lyons JS, Mieler WF. American Academy of

Ophthalmology. Revised recommendations on screening for chloroquine and
hydroxychloroquine retinopathy. Ophthalmology 201 1;118:415-22.

 

mechanisms of actions and toxic manifestations from malaria to multifarious
diseases. J Antimicrobial Chemother 2015;70:1608-21.

van der Schaft J, Deinum J, Spuls PI,
de Bruin-Weller MS. Ten years experience with oral immunosuppressive
treatment in adult patients with atopic dermatitis in two academic centres. J Eur
Acad Dermatol Venereol 2015;29:1905-12.

Reddy MS, Venugopal K, Perumalla R, Narasimhan G,
Arikichenin O, et al. Tacrolimus-related adverse effects in liver transplant re
 

s association with trough concentrations. Ind J Gastroenter 2014:

  

. Buell C, Koo J. Long-term safety of mycophenolate mofetil and cyclosporine: a

review. J Drugs Dermatol 2008;7:741-8.

. Zimmerman AB, Berger EM, Elmariah SB, Soter NA. The use of mycophe
nolate mofetil for the treatment of autoimmune and chronic idiopathic urticaria:
experience in 19 patients. J Am Acad Dermatol 2012;66:767-70.

. Neverman L, Weinberger M. Treatment of chronic urticaria in children with

antihistamines and cyclosporine. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 2014;2:
434-8,

Kessel A, Toubi E. Cyclosporine-A in severe chronic urticaria: the option for
long-term therapy. Allergy 2010:65:1478-82

 
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL PRACT
VOLUME Mf, NUMBER

TABLE E1. Combinations of alternative agents used in patients

YAU KWNE

10
ise
12
13
14

15
16
17
18
19
20

21
22
23,
24
25

Alternative agents

sulfasalazine + tacrolimus

dapsone + hydroxychloroquine; dapsone + sulfasalazine

dapsone + hydroxychloroquine

hydroxychloroquine + mycophenolate

dapsone + sulfasalazine

tacrolimus + hydroxychloroquine

hydroxychloroquine + cyclosporine; hydroxychloroquine +
sulfasalazine; hydroxychloroquine + tacrolimus;
hydroxychloroquine + mycophenolate; tacrolimus +
sulfasalazine; cyclosporine + mycophenolate;
hydroxychloroquine + etanercept + mycophenolate

tacrolimus + omalizumab, tacrolimus + hydroxychloroquine,
tacrolimus + sulfasalazine

dapsone + sulfasalazine; sulfasalazine +tacrolimus

omalizumab + cyclosporine

omalizumab + hydroxychloroquine

dapsone + hydroxychloroquine

IVIG + hydroxychloroquine

dapsone + hydroxychloroquine; dapsone + sulfasalazine;
dapsone + sulfasalazine + heparin; heparin + stanozolol

omalizumab + mycophenolate

tacrolimus + hydroxychloroquine

dapsone + hydroxychloroquine

dapsone + sulfasalazine

omalizumab + sulfasalazine; omalizumab + cyclosporine

tacrolimus + dapsone; hydroxychloroquine + dapsone;
hydroxychloroquine + mycophenolate;
hydroxychloroquine + sulfasalazine

dapsone + hydroxychloroquine; omalizumab + mycophenolate

dapsone + hydroxychloroquine

dapsone + hydroxychloroquine

mycophenolate + hydroxychloroquine

dapsone + hydroxychloroquine

SETH AND KHAN 6.e1

TABLE E2. AEs experienced by patients treated with dapsone
AEs reported with dapsone
Reported AE No. of patients

Asymptomatic drop in hemoglobin level Be
Elevated transaminase level

Headache

Symptomatic drop in hemoglobin level
Thrombocytopenia

Nausea

Methemoglobinemia

Palpitations

Restless legs

Fatigue

Hypoproteinemia

Paresthesias

Bee HE NNNNNWASE

Strange dreams

  

If a patient reported more than | AE, the patient i
patient reported the same AE with multiple trials of dapsone, the patient is accounted
for only once.

accounted for more than once. If a

TABLE 3. AEs experienced by patients treated with
sulfasalazine

AEs reported with sulfasalazine

Reported AE No. of patients
Diarrhea 5
Nausea

Headache

GI upset

Abdominal pain
Leukopenia
Constipation
Flu-like symptoms
Myalgia
Dyspepsia

Bee ee ND RR AY

Anorexia
6.e2 SETH AND KHAN

TABLE E4. AEs
hydroxychloroquine

experienced by

AEs reported with hydroxychloroquine
Reported AE

Diarrhea

Upper respiratory tract infection symptoms
Blurry vision

Headaches

Eye floaters

Abdominal cramps

Nausea

Rash

patients

treated with

No. of patients

TABLE E5. AEs experienced by patients treated with tacrolimus

AEs reported with tacrolimus
Reported AE

Headache

Nausea

Increased creatinine level
Dyspepsia

Increase in blood pressure
Abdominal pain

Ankle swelling

Tremor

Diarrhea

Paresthesias

Insomnia

Memory and speech problem
Hair loss

Myalgia

Arthralgia

Irritability

GI upset

Dysphagia

No. of patients

5

eee ee eee NNHNHHNHNHKHEA

TABLE E6. AEs
mycophenolate

experienced

AEs reported with mycophenolate
Reported AE

Headaches

Fatigue

Drop in WBC count
Dyspepsia

Diarrhea

GI upset

Back pain
Abdominal pain
Blurry vision
Nausea

Irritability

Difficulty concentrating

J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL PRACT

by patients

MONTH 2016

treated with

No. of patients

ee eee ee ee a

TABLE E7. AEs experienced by patients treated with cyclosporine

AEs reported with cyclosporine
Reported AE

Paresthesias
Abdominal discomfort
Headache

Increased creatinine
Dyspepsia

Nausea

Hypertrichosis
Tremor

No. of patients

Bee reP EY YNHWN
