J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
VOLUME 132, NUMBER 4

shown that serum procalcitonin levels are below 0.50 ng/mL in
malignant tumors, pulmonary infarction, * viral infection, and autoimmune diseases.” Procalcitonin levels show more sensitivity
and specificity than do CRP levels for distinguishing bacterial infections from disease flares in autoimmune disease.” According to
a recent study, 56 patients with systemic inflammatory responses
including malignancy, viral infection, allergy, and drug-induced
inflammation had a significantly lower frequency of positive procalcitonin tests (>0.5 ng/mL) than did a bacterial infection group.°

Interestingly, serum procalcitonin levels tended to increase
according to the severity of the drug hypersensitivity phenotypes.
Mean serum procalcitonin level was higher in patients with
SJS/TEN than in those with DRESS and maculopapular rash. This
suggests that serum procalcitonin level may depend on the
severity of inflammation, although it is lower in the drug
hypersensitivity group than in the bacterial infection group.
A meta-analysis has shown that procalcitonin levels are closely
correlated with the severity of sepsis and outcomes.’

On multivariate analysis after adjusting for other variables,
serum procalcitonin levels were more predictive than CRP levels,
although both were independent risk factors for bacterial infection.
A previous study showed that serum CRP and IL-6 levels could be
lowered by corticosteroid administration, unlike serum procalcitonin levels.*” Therefore, we expect that high serum procalcitonin
level may be a useful biomarker for distinguishing drug hypersensitivity from bacterial infection, even when patients are being
treated with corticosteroids or other immunosuppressive agents.

Our study involved patients with rare diseases in a single
ospital, and so the number of cases was small and the study was
cross-sectional. In addition, we included only sepsis patients with
proven bacteremia to differentiate from drug hypersensitivity
definitely. Therefore, the predictive value of serum procalcitonin
level may be diminished in patients with less severe infection.
Another limitation is that we did not follow up the levels of
procalcitonin. Further study of the correlation between serum
procalcitonin level and drug hypersensitivity is needed.

In conclusion, the levels of serum procalcitonin may be a better
biomarker than serum CRP levels for distinguishing delayed-type
drug hypersensitivity from systemic bacterial infection. Appropriate use of serum procalcitonin levels could help physicians
make critical life and death decisions.

 

 

 

Sun-Young Yoon, MD“
Seung Hee Baek, PhD?
Sujeong Kim, MD“

Yoon Su Lee, MD“

Taehoon Lee, MD“
Yun-Jeong Bae, MD°
Hyouk-Soo Kwon, MD, PhD“
Jin Won Huh, MD, PhD“
Sang-Bum Hong, MD, PhD“
You Sook Cho, MD, PhD“
Sail Chun, MD, PhD*
Chae-Man Lim, MD, PhD“
Younsuck Koh, MD, PhD*
Hee-Bom Moon, MD, PhD“
Tae-Bum Kim, MD, PhD“

From the Departments of “Allergy and Clinical Immunology and °Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, ‘the Health Screening and Promotion Center, and the Departments of “Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine and °Laboratory Medicine, Asan
Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. E-mail:
allergy @medimail.co.kr.

LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 983

This study was supported by a grant from the National Project for Personalized Genomic
Medicine, Ministry for Health & Welfare, Republic of Korea (grant no. A111218PGO1).

Disclosure of potential conflict of interest: The authors declare that they have no relevant
conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES

1. Schneider HG, Lam QT. Procalcitonin for the clinical laboratory: a review. Pathology 2007;39:383-90.

2. Tamaki K, Kogata Y, Sugiyama D, Nakazawa T, Hatachi S, Kageyama G, et al.
Diagnostic accuracy of serum procalcitonin concentrations for detecting systemic
bacterial infection in patients with systemic autoimmune diseases. J Rheumatol
2008:35:114-9.

3. Cakir E, Deniz O, Ozcan O, Tozkoparan E, Yaman H, Akgul EO, et al. Pleural fluid
and serum procalcitonin as diagnostic tools in tuberculous pleurisy, Clin Biochem
2005;38:234-8,

4. Prat C, Dominguez J, Andreo F, Blanco S, Pallares A, Cuchillo F, et al. Procalcitonin and neopterin correlation with aetiology and severity of pneumonia. J Infect
2006;52:169-77.

5. Joo K, Park W, Lim MJ, Kwon SR, Yoon J. Serum procalcitonin for differentiating
bacterial infection from disease flares in patients with autoimmune diseases.
J Korean Med Sci 2011;26:1147-51.

6. Oshita H, Sakurai J, Kamitsuna M. Semi-quantitative procalcitonin test for the
diagnosis of bacterial infection: clinical use and experience in Japan.
J Microbiol Immunol Infect 2010;43:222-7.

7. Mitaka C. Clinical laboratory differentiation of infectious versus _noninfectious systemic inflammatory response syndrome. Clin Chim Acta 2005;
351:17-29.

8. Muller B, Peri G, Doni A, Perruchoud AP, Landmann R, Pasqualini F, et al. High
circulating levels of the IL-1 type II decoy receptor in critically ill patients with
sepsis: association of high decoy receptor levels with glucocorticoid administration. J Leukoc Biol 2002;72:643-9.

9, Rinaldi S, Adembri C, Grechi $, De Gaudio AR. Low-dose hydrocortisone during
severe sepsis: effects on microalbuminuria. Crit Care Med 2006;34:2334-9.

Available online June 12, 2013.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2013.04.038

D-dimer: A biomarker for antihistamine
resistant chronic urticaria

To the Editor:

Chronic urticaria (CU) may affect up to 1% of the general
population at some point in life and can severely impair quality of
life. Most patients respond satisfactorily to antihistamines, but
some are unresponsive and only part of these show a particularly
severe disease. We recently found that CU is characterized by an
activation of coagulation cascade paralleling disease severity.’
The activation pathway involved is related to tissue factor” expressed by the eosinophils present in the inflammatory infiltrate,’
and in some patients, the activation may be intense enough to lead
to an elevation in plasma levels of D-dimer, a marker of fibrinolysis.’ Thrombin is able to activate mast cells, triggering their degranulation. D-dimer measurement is easily available and thus
represents a potentially ideal candidate prognostic marker for
CU; its usefulness as a predictor of response to antihistamines
was studied here.

Ninety-one patients (male/female 22/69; mean age, 46.9 years;
range, 11-85; median, 47) with spontaneous CU were studied.
The mean disease duration was 28.6 months (median, 5; range,
2-240). To assess autoreactivity and disease severity, all antihistamine therapies were stopped on the first visit, and patients
filled-up a standardized questionnaire about the severity of
pruritus and wheals on days 5 to 7 off antihistamines to calculate
the mean urticaria activity score (UAS).° All patients were then
given cetirizine 10 mg/d for 7 to 14 days as a standard treatment;
in case of little or no response, the dosage was increased 2-fold for

 
984 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR

100 5
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

% with elevated D-dimer

 

J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
OCTOBER 2013

 

3 4 5

Response to cetirizine

FIG 1. Proportion of patients with CU showing elevated D-dimer plasma levels as a function of clinical
response to cetirizine. x-axis: 1, excellent; 2, good; 3, partial; 4, poor; 5, no response to the drug.

4 days and then 3-fold for 3 further days. Patients assessed the
response to cetirizine by quantifying their wheals and pruritus before and after the treatment on a visual analog scale.

Response to antihistamine treatment was graded as follows:

e Excellent: complete disappearance of pruritus and wheals
under cetirizine at licensed dose

e Good: nearly complete (ie, >75%) disappearance of pruritus and wheals with cetirizine at licensed dose or at higher
doses

e Partial: 50% to 75% clinical improvement by cetirizine at
higher than licensed doses

e Poor: 25% to 50% clinical improvement by cetirizine even
at higher than licensed dose

e Absent: no response at any dose of cetirizine

Fifty-one of 91 patients underwent an autologous plasma skin
test (APST; n = 37) and/or an autologous serum skin test (ASST;
n = 16) to assess auroreactivity on days 5 to 7 off antihistamines.

Patients performed in vitro analyses at hospital sites closest to
their homes or workplaces. Plasma D-dimer levels were measured
by using ELISA 7 to 14 days after the first visit, while patients
were taking antihistamines and before any immunosuppressive
treatment was started in nonresponders, and were expressed in
ng/mL. Because of the existence of various cutoffs as a consequence of differences in standardization between the various producers of the assay kits, plasma levels were classified as “normal”
(within the normal range for that particular method) or “elevated.” Thyroid autoantibodies, C-reactive protein (CRP), and
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) were measured in all patients as well.

All clinical investigations were carried out according to the
principles of the Declaration of Helsinki; all patients gave their
informed consent to diagnostic procedures. Because the study
was based on data stemming from routine clinical activity,
approval by an ethics committee was not needed. Proportions
were compared by using the x’ test with Yates’ correction. Probability values of less than 5% were considered statistically
significant.

The mean average UAS in the study population was 3.6
(median, 4; range, 2-5). The response to cetirizine was “excellent” in 41 (45%) patients, “good” in 14 (15%), “partial” in 5
(5%), “poor” in 23 (25%), and “absent” in 8 (9%). Autoreactivity
was detected in 31 of 37 (86%) patients by APST and in 8 of 16

TABLE I. Clinical response to cetirizine in patients with different
CU severity in function of D-dimer levels

Excellent or good

UAS D-dimer response to cetirizine P value
2 Normal 6/6 (100%) _—

2 Elevated 0/0

3 Normal 27129 (93%) <.001
3 Elevated 1/7 (14%)

4 Normal 20/23 (87%) <.001
4 Elevated 2/13 (15%)

5 Normal 0/3 (0%) NS

5 Elevated 0/10 (0%)

NS, Not significant.

(50%) patients by ASST. Both patients who underwent both tests
scored positive on the APST and negative on the ASST. D-dimer
plasma levels were elevated in 30 of 91 (33%) patients. Eighteen
(20%) patients showed circulating thyroid autoantibodies, and
ESR and CRP were elevated in 5 (6%) and 7 (8%) patients,
respectively. Plasma D-dimer levels were elevated in 0 of 41 (0%)
patients showing an “excellent” response to cetirizine, 3 of 14
(21%) patients showing a “good” response, 3 of 5 (60%) patients
showing a “partial” response, 18 of 23 (78%) patients showing a
“poor” response, and 7 of 8 (88%) nonresponders (Fig 1). On
comparing patients with a disease of similar severity showing either normal or elevated D-dimer levels, it turned out that the latter
were much more frequently cetirizine-resistant, particularly when
urticaria severity was moderate (P < .001 for both patients with
UAS 3 and 4; Table 1). Fig 2 shows the individual D-dimer levels
in patients with CU of different severity. After “normalization” to
a cutoff level of 500 ng/mL, in those showing elevated D-dimer
levels, the mean plasma levels were 697 (range, 696-1163) in 3
subjects showing a “good” response to cetirizine, 634 (542-1306)
in 3 subjects showing a “partial” response, 875 (542-2490) in 17
patients showing a “poor” response, and 981 (723-2450) in 7 nonresponders. Elevated D-dimer levels did not correlate with thyroid
autoimmunity (coincidence in only 6 of 18 [33%] patients with
thyroid autoimmunity), but did with elevated CPR (6 of 8 [75%])
and elevated ESR (3 of 5 [60%]) levels. Follow-up data were
available for 3 patients; in 2 patients unresponsive to cetirizine at
any dosage and showing elevated D-dimer levels, plasma levels
dropped to the normal range following treatment with heparin
and tranexamic acid’ in coincidence with periods of effectiveness

 
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
VOLUME 132, NUMBER 4

LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 985

 

 

 

2500 + 6
2000 2
i)
£ 8
B 1500 | 5 8
Qa ° °
a
1000 ° 9
° 8

° °
500 | ° 8 8
ee ee
2 4 5

Urticaria activity score

FIG 2. Individual levels of D-dimer in patients showing CU of different severity.

of antihistamine treatment alone; in the other case, D-dimer levels
dropped from 450 to 410 ng/mL and then to 300 ng/mL (normal
value <280) within 3 months under ciclosporin therapy; the last
measurement was in coincidence with a much better control of
the disease.

This study group was highly representative of the CU population: females prevailed, autoreactivity was present in 50% by
the ASST and in 86% by the APST,' 20% showed thyroid autoimmunity, the median disease duration was 5 months, and disease
severity was well distributed between 2 and 5 UAS. Patients
with severe CU often show elevated plasma levels of D-dimer,”
and some of them may benefit dramatically from anticoagulant
therapy,” suggesting that coagulation factors might play a pathogenic role that goes well beyond that of innocent bystanders. Heparin, oral anticoagulants, and other drugs interfering with the
coagulation such as synthetic protease inhibitors have been also
effective in some patients with unremitting CU. This study suggests that elevated D-dimer levels can be considered as a biomarker for antihistamine-resistant CU, particularly in patients
showing a moderate disease severity. If coagulation factors acted
uniquely, activating mast cells, a good response to antihistamines
should be expected anyway. However, often this is not the case,
suggesting that mediators other than histamine may be sometimes
involved, making antihistamines ineffective at any dosage. In
effect, in animal models, thrombin not only activates proteaseactivated receptor-1 on mast cells but also increases vascular permeability acting directly on endothelial cells and bypasses the
first part of the complement cascade by generating C5a in the absence of C3.’ However, D-dimer levels may also be elevated in
angioedema because of C1-inhibitor deficiency” and in nonallergic asthma,’ 2 diseases in which antihistamines show little or no
efficacy. The possibility that in patients with CU showing an activation of fibrinolysis a supplementary mechanism of inflammation is operative is suggested by the different response to
cetirizine observed in subjects with CU of the same severity
with or without elevated D-dimer levels. In this respect, CU is
also characterized by elevated vascular endothelial growth factor,
one of the major mediators of vascular permeability, expressed by

skin eosinophils, which parallels disease severity and is associated with plasma levels of fragment F1 +2 and, hence, with the activation of the coagulation cascade. '” Of course, it is also possible
that D-dimer simply increases as other acute phase parameters do,
without any participation of the coagulation cascade in the pathogenic mechanisms underlying antihistamine-resistant urticaria.

I thank Prof Massimo Cugno for creating Fig 2.
Riccardo Asero, MD

From Ambulatorio di Allergologia, Clinica San Carlo, Paderno Dugnano, Milan,
Italy. E-mail: r.asero @libero.it.

Disclosure of potential conflict of interest: R. Asero declares that he has no relevant conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES

1. Asero R, Tedeschi A, Riboldi P, Cugno M. Plasma of patients with chronic urticaria shows signs of thrombin generation, and its intradermal injection causes
wheal-and-flare reactions much more frequently than autologous
J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006;117:1113-7.

2. Asero R, Tedeschi A, Coppola R, Griffini S, Paparella P, Riboldi P, et al. Activation
of the tissue pathway of blood coagulation in patients with chronic urticaria.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007;119:705-10.

3. Cugno M, Marzano AV, Tedeschi A, Fanoni D, Venegoni L, Asero R. Expression
of tissue factor by eosinophils in patients with chronic urticaria, Int Arch Allergy
Immunol 2009;148:170-4.

4, Asero R, Tedeschi A, Riboldi P, Griffini $, Bonanni E, Cugno M. Severe chronic
urticaria is associated with elevated plasma levels of D-dimer. Allergy 2008;63:
176-80.

5. Zuberbier T, Asero R, Bindslev-Jensen C, Canonica GW, Church MK, GimenezAmau A, et al. EAACI/GA2LEN; EDF; WAO guideline: definition, classification
and diagnosis of urticaria, Allergy 2009;64:1417-26.

6. Asero R, Tedeschi A, Cugno M. Heparin and tranexamic acid therapy may be
effective in treatment-resistant chronic urticaria with elevated D-dimer: a pilot
study. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 2010;152:384-9.

7. Huber-Lang M, Sarma JV, Zetoune FS, Rittirsch D, Neff TA, et al. Generation of
CSa in the absence of C3: a new complement activation pathway. Nat Med 2006;
12:682-7.

8. Cugno M, Cicardi M, Bottasso B, Coppola R, Paonessa R, Mannucci PM, et al.
Activation of the coagulation cascade in Cl-inhibitor deficiencies. Blood 1997;
89:3213-8.

9, Asero R, Tedeschi A, Cugno M. Markers of autoreactivity, coagulation and
angiogenesis in patients with nonallergic asthma. Allergy 201 1;66:1339-44.

serum.
986 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR

10. Tedeschi A, Asero R, Marzano AV, Lorini M, Fanoni D, Berti E, et al. Plasma
levels and skin eosinophil expression of vascular endothelial growth factor in patients with chronic urticaria, Allergy 2009;64:1616-22.

Available online June 12, 2013.
http://dx.doi-org/10.1016/j jaci.2013.04.037

Hereditary angioedema caused by the p.Thr309Lys mutation in the F712 gene: A multifactorial
disease

To the Editor:

Hereditary angioedema (HAE) related to estrogens, nowadays
identified as HAE with normal C1 inhibitor (C1-INH) function,!
is a kind of bradykinin (BK)-induced angioedema. In some cases,
a mutation has been detected in the F/2 gene (HAE-factor XII
[HAE-FXII]).-*

 
 

Blood

Bradykinin

Inactive
peptides

 

J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
OCTOBER 2013

BK, the high-affinity ligand of type 2 BK receptor, is produced
from high-molecular-weight kininogen upon cleavage by proteases (kallikrein, FXIIa, and plasmin), hereafter called kininogenases. BK is catabolized mainly by metallopeptidases
(kininases): angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), aminopeptidase P (APP), and carboxypeptidase N (CPN).** BK level
elevation produces an increase in endothelial permeability, vascular leakage, and angioedema.~” A schematic representation of BK
generation and catabolism is shown in Fig |(reprinted with permission from Defendi et al° [after modifications]).

We report data from studies performed on a large 3-generation
Spanish family with a strictly estrogen-precipitating angioedema
phenotype in an attempt to investigate factors that might affect the
clinical expression of this disease.

The study was approved by the Research Ethical Committee of
the Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, and all the
participants provided informed consent.

Dextran Sulfate

 
   
  

COOH

 

FIG 1. The kallikrein-kinin system: BK generation and catabolism. The kallikrein-kinin system consists of 3
plasma proteins that assemble when blood comes into contact with triggers, for example, negatively
charged surfaces: FXII, plasma prekallikrein (PKK), and the nonenzymatic cofactor high-molecular-weight
kininogen (HK); 80% of blood HK-PKK association is bound onto the endothelium. FXII and HK directly bind
to polyanions; surface binding induces a conformational change in FXIl, leading to limited proteolytic
activity. Consecutively, activated FXII (FXIla) cleaves PKK, generating plasma kallikrein (KK). In an amplified
reaction, KK efficiently activates further FXII proenzyme molecules and cleaves its cofactor HK to yield BK,
the B2 receptor ligand. This enzymatic activity is estimated in plasma by spontaneous kininogenase activity.
The incubation on ice of plasma with dextran sulfate refers to full proenzyme activation, with subsequent
measurement of the plasma PAA. Proenzyme activation and protease activities are under C1-INH control.
The circulating CPN converts BK into desArg®-BK, the B1 receptor ligand, and the membrane-bound
(glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol anchor, GP!) APP and ACE inactivate the receptor-binding capacity of both
peptides. Reprinted with permission from Defendi et al® (after modifications).
