QJM Advance Access published March 9, 2016

Qualitative effects of omalizumab on concomitant IgE-mediated disease in a

severe asthmatic population — a real life observational study.
Cusack RP, Sahadevan A, Lane SJ.

Department of Respiratory Medicine, Adelaide and Meath Hospital, Dublin,

Ireland

Abstract

Introduction: Omalizumab is a recombinant humanised monoclonal antibody

(anti-IgE) licensed for use in GINA 5 asthma or for chronic idiopathic urticaria.

Many patients with asthma have concomitant allergic diseases such as
dermatitis and sinusitis. IgE is also implicated in allergic-bronchopulmonary
disease (ABPA). In addition, extreme sensitivity to allergen can prevent the
initiation of allergen immunotherapy.

Aim: The aim of this study was to assess the efficacy of omalizumab on
symptoms of concomitant non asthmatic IgE-mediated allergic disease in a
population of severe GINA 5 ina real life observational setting.

Design: This study is a retrospective, observational study assessing patients
reported allergic, non-asthmatic symptom response to omalizumab treatment.
Methods: 56 severe asthmatics treated with omalizumab were studied. 37
patients had concomitant rhino-sinusitis, 13 had dermatitis and 4 ABPA.
Subjects were asked to grade the improvement in their symptom scores on an
analogue scale from 0 (no response) to 10 (excellent response).

Results: Mean improvement from baseline was 5 and 1.8 in patients with
allergic rhino-sinusitis and dermatitis, respectively. Mean improvement from
baseline in respiratory symptoms in patients with ABPA was 4.0.
Conclusions: The results from our study suggest that omalizumab may have a
role in allergic disease outside of its current license.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Association of Physicians.
All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com

9102 ‘Lz yore uo ysan6 Aq Woy papeojumog
Introduction

Omalizumab is currently the only anti-IgE agent available for clinical use in
asthma. It is licenced for severe GINA 5 allergic asthma and for refractory
chronic idiopathic urticaria. (1) It is an IgG4 anti-[gE mAB that competitively
binds to and forms complexes with free IgE at the same C3 binding site that IgE
binds to both the high affinity IgE receptor on mast cells and basophils (FCER1)
and the low affinity IgE receptor (FECR2) on other immunomodulatory cells.
This leads to down regulation of these receptors over a period of 12-16
weeks.(2) It has been shown to be effective in reducing hospital admissions,
adverse effects and symptom scores in severe asthma. It is approved by NICE
for this indication. In our hospital population we have previously shown that
omalizumab is effective in reducing exacerbation rate and hospital admissions

in patients with severe asthma.(3)

Many patients with asthma have other concomitant IgE —mediated diseases such
as rhino-sinusitis and dermatitis. In addition, IgE has been implicated in other
inflammatory conditions such as ABPA.(4) In view of the expense of this
treatment there is a dearth of clinical information on the effectiveness of
omalizumab outside of its primary licenced indications. We felt that a
pragmatic study examining the effectiveness on omalizumab on non-asthmatic
IgE-mediated disease would be of real life clinic interest and add to the IgE

neutralisation therapy debate.

Aim

The aim of this real life observational study was to assess the efficacy of
omalizumab on symptoms of concomitant non asthmatic IgE-mediated allergic

disease in a population of severe GINA 5 asthmatics.

9102 ‘Lz yore uo ysan6 Aq Woy papeojumog
Methods

We studied 56 with severe GINA 5 allergic asthma who were given
omalizumab. 49 were deemed responsive to therapy at 16 weeks whereas 7 did
not respond and omalizumab therapy was discontinued. 37 patients had

concomitant rhino-sinusitis, 13 dermatitis and 4 ABPA.

All patients underwent a detailed questionnaire by the principle author. Patients
gave verbal consent to be included in this study. Patients with rhino-sinusitis
and dermatitis were asked to grade their non-asthmatic symptom response on a
qualitative analogue scale whereby 0 = no response to a maximum response of
10 (excellent response to omalizumab). Patients with ABPA were asked to
grade their asthmatic symptoms on the same scale. Dosage of omalizumab was
as per the manufacturer’s guideline for the primary asthma indication in all 56

patients based on IgE levels and weight in kilograms.

The data was analysed using the statistical package for social science (SPSS
V21). Data was presented as scatterplot graphs below. Patients’ baseline
symptom score for rhino-sinusitis, dermatitis and asthmatic symptoms was
recorded as 0. Patients’ subjective recording of change in their symptoms on
omalizumab treatment was recorded as 0 if no change in symptoms, positive if
improvement of symptoms, and a negative score if worsening of symptoms
compared to baseline. Paired-samples t-tests’ were conducted to evaluate the
change in patients symptom scores post omalizumab treatment. A p value of

<0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Results

9102 ‘Lz yore uo ysan6 Aq Woy papeojumog
Table lillustrates the demographics of patients (n=56) treated with omalizumab
for severe asthma with concomitant IgE mediated disease. 37 patients had
concomitant allergic rhino-sinusitis, 13 had allergic dermatitis, 4 ABPA, 2
patients with extreme allergen sensitivity preventing AIT. Patient age ranged
from 14 to 76. The mean IgE level pre omalizumab treatment was 346 IU/ml.
The mean positive skin prick test result was 2 out of 7 (range 0 — 7). The mean

overall duration of omalizumab therapy was 36 months (range 4 — 90 months).

Figure 1 shows the effect of omalizumab on 37 patients’ concomitant rhinosinusitis symptoms with an overall improvement of 5. 28 out of 37 patients had
an improvement in their rhino-sinusitis symptoms on omalizumab, with 9
patients reported no response. No patients reported a deterioration of their
symptoms on omalizumab. 22 out of 37 patients reported a >5 improvement
score in their rhino-sinusitis symptoms on omalizumab. Using a paired-samples
t-test there was a statistically significant improvement in patients allergic rhinosinusitis symptoms on omalizumab (p<001, n=37, mean change of 5, standard

deviation 3.6).

Figure 2 illustrates the effect of omalizumab on 13 patients’ concomitant
dermatitis symptom score with a mean improvement of 1.8. 9 patients out of 13
reported no response, with 4 patients reported an improvement in their
symptoms. No patients reported deterioration in their dermatitis symptoms on
omalizumab. Only 2 patients out of 13 in the dermatitis group reported a >5
improvement score in their dermatitis symptoms on omalizumab. Using a
paired-samples t-test there was no statistically significant improvement in
patients allergic dermatitis symptoms on omalizumab (p=0.073, n=13, mean

change of 1.8, standard deviation 3.2).

Figure 3 illustrates the effect of omalizumab on asthmatic symptom score in 4

patients with ABPA. Patients with ABPA reported a mean improvement of 4.0

9102 ‘Lz yore uo ysan6 Aq Woy papeojumog
in their respiratory symptoms. No patients reported a dis-improvement in their
asthmatic symptoms on omalizumab. 3 patients out of 4 reported an
improvement in their asthmatic symptoms on treatment, with | patient reporting
no change. 2 patients out of 4 reported a >5 improvement in their asthmatic
symptom score on omalizumab. Using a paired-samples t-test there was not a
statistically significant improvement in patients with ABPA’s asthmatic

symptoms on omalizumab (p =0.098, n = 4, mean change of 4.0).

Discussion

Our study has shown that omalizumab is effective in treating concomitant
allergic rhinitis and dermatitis in patients with severe allergic asthma in a real
observational study. In addition, it improved asthmatic symptoms in patients
with ABPA.

IgE is central to the pathogenesis of the allergic diseases asthma, rhinitis,
dermatitis, food allergy and anaphylaxis. (7) It has also been implicated in the
pathogenesis of the fungal hypersensitivity ABPA.(4, 6) The discovery of the
central pathogenic role of IgE in asthma is a triumph of translational medicine.
In the early 1900s anaphylaxis, as described by Portier and Richet, became a
central problem to biologists when generating prophylactic vaccines for
infectious diseases such as diphtheria and tetanus in experimental animals.(8)
When these animals received their second dose of toxin after a latency period of
c.10 days, instead of becoming tolerant or protected against the toxin, they
developed anaphylaxis. It was also seen in humans in cases of food allergy in

particular.

The major features of anaphylaxis included wheeze, low blood pressure and
invariably death. It was subsequently discovered that anaphylactic activity, was
antigen-specific, required a latency period for sensitisation to develop, could be

passively transferred by either blood transfusion or via serum, was fixed to

9102 ‘Lz yore uo ysan6 Aq Woy papeojumog
tissue and mediated in part by histamine. Indeed the centrality of acute wheeze
led to the novel concept at the time that asthma was indeed an anaphylactic
phenomenon, a concept that gained increasing credibility throughout the early
20th century. As asthma was a major feature of hay fever and acute allergic
reactions to foods, a conceptual convergence around the pathogenesis of these
diseases developed at the time. Indeed, anaphylactic activity was soon
discovered in all of these diseases and became known as reagin or reaginic
activity. Reagin was subsequently isolated as the antibody IgE in 1967.(9)
Furthermore Burrows showed in 1989 that most asthmatics and patients with
allergic rhinitis had high IgE levels when corrected for age and gender.(10) The
effectiveness of omalizumab in asthma has proven the concept that IgE is

centrally pathogenic to this condition.

We reasoned that omalizumab would be effective in other non-asthmatic IgEmediated diseases. To address this we studied its effectiveness in concomitant
allergic diseases in a population of severe asthmatics treated with omalizumab
for the primary indication of asthma. We chose this approach because of the
high cost associated with the treatment per severe asthmatic patient per year, the
fact that the treatment is not licenced for these concomitant conditions, and
because of the dearth of information relating to anti-IgE therapy in these
concomitant conditions. In the Irish setting omalizumab can cost from €6000 to
€47000 depending on patient’s IgE level and body weight. Taking an average
cost of €25,000 per person per 12 months, with 56 patients and an average
treatment time of 36 months, this study would have cost €4,200,000. No large
randomised controlled trials have been financed to assess omalizumab in nonasthmatic allergic disease and therefore we currently have to rely and clinical
evidence and small trials. We understand that this is a retrospective, subjective
study it is still important as it shows that omalizumab is clinically effective in

the clinical setting for non-asthmatic allergic disease supporting current

9102 ‘Lz yore uo ysan6 Aq Woy papeojumog
evidence. Due to the high cost of producing a similar prospective study this
may not be funded or feasible going forward and thus physicians may be limited
to small trials and case studies to support their use of omalizumab outside of

current guidelines.

Our study shows that omalizumab therapy can be beneficial outside of its
current use. We have proven that omalizumab statistically improves the
symptoms of allergic rhino-sinusitis. It improved the asthmatic symptoms in
patients with ABPA however this was not statistically significant due to small
numbers of patients. Furthermore we have shown that omalizumab can improve
symptoms of allergic dermatitis in a small amount of patients although this is

not statistically significant.

Both allergic rhino-sinusitis and dermatitis appear to have a common IgE
pathway however there appears to be heterogeneity in their response to
treatment. In allergic rhinitis there is clear evidence to suggest its role in severe
non responsive disease however for allergic dermatitis there is data which
shows both a positive and neutral response to omalizumab treatment.(2) The
clinical course of allergic dermatitis has not consistently shown to be
significantly affected by omalizumab treatment in small trials and case
reports.(11, 12) It has been suggested that omalizumab may be effective in
higher doses than that licensed for use with asthma, however no large
randomised controlled trials have taken place to date, and there are no
guidelines for dosing in allergic dermatitis.(12) This study suggests that despite
their common pathway, omalizumab is not as effective a treatment for allergic

dermatitis as it is for rhino-sinusitis as per current treatment guidelines.

Although the study is limited in that the assessments are subjective and semiqualitative we feel it adds important new insights to the debate surrounding the

clinical effectiveness of anti-IgE therapy in allergic diseases. A particular

9102 ‘Lz yore uo ysan6 Aq Woy papeojumog
strength of the study is large cohort of asthmatics with concomitant allergic

diseases that have been on prolonged omalizumab therapy.

We feel this study will be of interest across multiple specialities. It will be
relevant for Ear Nose and Throat specialists for the treatment of severe
refractory allergic rhinitis, dermatologists for allergic dermatitis, and physicians

with an interest in ABPA.

Figure Legend

Figure 1: The effect of omalizumab on patients’ concomitant rhino-sinusitis
symptoms. N = 37. Patients were asked to grade their symptoms response on a
qualitative subjective scale whereby 0 = no response to a maximum response of
10 (excellent response) to omalizumab. 9/37 patients reported no response in
their symptoms on omalizumab; 28/37 patients reported an improvement. No
patient reported a deterioration of their symptoms on omalizumab. 22/37
patients reported a >5 point improvement score in their symptoms on
omalizumab. There was a statistically significant improvement in patients
allergic rhino-sinusitis symptoms on omalizumab using a paired samples t-test

(p<001, n=37, mean change of 5).

Figure 2: The effect of omalizumab on patients’ concomitant dermatitis
symptoms. N= 13. Patients were asked to grade their symptoms response on a
qualitative subjective scale whereby 0 = no response to a maximum response of
10 (excellent response) to omalizumab. 9/13 patients reported no response in
their symptoms on omalizumab. 4/13 patients reported an improvement. No
patients reported a deterioration of their symptoms on omalizumab. 2/13
patients reported a >5 point improvement score in their symptoms on
omalizumab. There was no statistically significant improvement in patients
allergic dermatitis symptoms on omalizumab using a paired samples t-test
(p=0.073, n=13, mean change of 1.8).

9102 ‘Lz yore uo ysan6 Aq Woy papeojumog
Figure 3: The effect of omalizumab on patients’ concomitant asthmatic
symptoms. N = 4 Patients were asked to grade their symptoms response on a
qualitative subjective scale whereby 0 = no response to a maximum response of
10 (excellent response) to omalizumab. 1/4 patients reported no response in
their symptoms on omalizumab. 3/4 patients reported an improvement. No
patients reported a deterioration of their symptoms on omalizumab. 2/4 patients
reported a >5 point improvement score in their symptoms on omalizumab.
Patients with ABPA reported a mean improvement of 4.0 in their respiratory
symptoms. There was no statistically significant improvement in patients with
ABPA’s asthmatic symptoms on omalizumab using a paired samples t-test (p
=0.098, n= 4, mean change = 4.0).

9102 ‘Lz yore uo ysan6 Aq Woy papeojumog
References

1. GINA. Global strategy for asthma managment and prevention 2014. NHI Publications. 2014.

2. Casale TB, Condemi J, LaForce C, Nayak A, Rowe M, Watrous M, et al. Effect of
omalizumab on symptoms of seasonal allergic rhinitis: a randomised control trial. JAMA 2001;
286(23):2956-67.

3. Subramaniam A, Al-Alawi M, Hamad §S , O’Callaghan J, Lane SJ. A study into efficacy of
omalizumab therapy in patients with severe persistent allergic asthma at a tertiary referral centre for
asthma in Ireland. Q J Med 2013; 106(7):631-4.

4. Ricketti AJ, Greenberger PA, Patterson R. Serum IgE as an important aid in management of
allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1984; 74(1):68-71.

6. Bargagli E, Madioni C, Olivieri C, Penza F, and Rottoli P. Churg-Strauss Vasculitis in a
Patient Treated with Omalizumab. J Asthma 2008; 45(2):115-6.

7. Gould HJ, Sutton BJ, Beavil AJ, McCloskey N, Coker HA, Fear D, Smurthwaite L. The
biology of IgE and the basis of allergic disease. Annu Rev Immunol 2002; 21:579-628.

8. Richet G. The discovery of anaphylaxis, a brief but triumphant encounter of two
physiologists. Hist Sci Med 2003; 37(4):463-9.

9: Johansson SG. IgE in allergic disease. Proc R Soc Med 196969(9):975-6.

10. Burrows B, Martinex FD, Halonen M, Barbee RA, Cline MG. Association of asthma with
serum IgE levels and skin-test reactivity to allergens. N Eng J Med 1989; 320(5):217-77.

11. Krathen RA, Hsu S. Failure of omalizumab for treatment of severe adult atopic dermatitis. J
Am Acad Dermatol 2005; 53(2):338-40.

12. Fernandez-Anton Martinez MC, Leis-Dosil V, Alfageme-Roldan F, Paracisini A, SanchexRamon S, Suarez Fernandez R. Omalizumab for the treatment of atopic dermatitis. Actos
Dermosifiliogr 2012; 103(7):624-8.

9102 ‘Lz yore uo ysan6 Aq Woy papeojumog
Table 1: Illustrates the demographics of patients treated with omalizumab for severe asthma
with concomitant IgE mediated disease. A positive skin prick test was deemed induration of
greater than 2 x 2 mm for 7 common allergens (dust, grass pollen, tree, cat, dog, horse and

aspergillus). ABPA, allergic bronchopulmonary disease.

 

 

N= 56
Male: Female 26:30
Age range in years 14-76
Positive skin rick test range 0-7 (mean =2)
Mean IgE pre-treatment 346 IU/ml
Omalizumab treatment length range in months 4-90 (mean 36 months)
Concomitant disease:
e Allergic rhino-sinusitis 37
e Allergic dermatitis 13
© ABPA 4

 

9102 ‘Lz yore uo ysan6 Aq Woy papeojumog
 

 

Patient number

16
14
12
10

ON FD OL

 

Rhinitis symptom score post

 

omalizumab
15
9 9
i i
No improvement 1-3 point 4-7 point 8-10 point
improvement improvement improvement

 

 

9102 ‘Lz yore uo ysan6 Aq Woy papeojumog
 

 

Patient number

10

 

Dermatitis symptom score post

 

omalizumab
9
2
Zs
No improvement 1-3 point 4-7 point 8-10 point

improvement improvement improvement

 

 

9102 ‘Lz yore uo ysan6 Aq Woy papeojumog
 

 

ABPA symptom score post
omalizumab

1 1 1 1

 

 

No improvement 1-3 point 4-7 point 8-10 point
improvement improvement improvement

 

 

9102 ‘Lz yore uo ysan6 Aq Woy papeojumog
