‘Department of Paediatric
Allergy, King's College
Hospital NHS Foundation
Trust, London, UK
Dermatology, Norfolk and
Norwich University Hospital,
Norwich, UK

3Science and Research
Department, Royal College of
Paediatrics and Child Health,
London, UK

‘Department of Immunology,
Royal Surrey County Hospital
NHS Foundation Trust,
Guildford, UK

5Royal Shrewsbury Hospital
NHS Trust, Shrewsbury, UK
6Skin Care Campaign, UK
Department of Paediatrics,
Imperial College, St Mary's
Hospital Campus, London, UK

Correspondence to

Dr Susan Leech, Department
of Paediatric Allergy, King’s
College Hospital NHS

Foundation Trust, Denmark Hill,

London SE5 SRS, UK;
susan.leech@kcl.ac.uk

Accepted 6 June 2011

i34

Downloaded from adc.bmj.com on October 5, 2014 - Published by group.bmj.com

Original article

The RCPCH care pathway for children with Urticaria,
Angio-oedema or Mastocytosis: an evidence and
consensus based national approach

Susan Leech,' Clive Grattan,” Kate Lloyd,? Sarah Deacock,’ Lynette Williams,*
Andrew Langford,® John Warner’; on behalf of the Science and Research Department,

Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health

ABSTRACT

Aims The Royal College of Paediatrics and Child

Health (RCPCH) Science and Research Department was
commissioned by the Department of Health to develop
national care pathways for children with allergies; the
urticaria, angio-oedema or mastocytosis pathway is

the fifth pathway. The pathways focus on defining the
competences required to improve the equity of care
received by children with allergic conditions.

Method The urticaria, angio-oedema or mastocytosis
pathway was developed by a multidisciplinary working
group and was based on a comprehensive review of
evidence. The pathway was reviewed by a broad group
of stakeholders including the public and approved by the
Allergy Care Pathways Project Board and the RCPCH
Clinical Standards Committee.

Results Three pathways are described: urticaria with
or without angio-oedema, angio-oedema without weals,
and mastocytosis. The results are presented in four
parts: evidence review, mapping, external review and
core knowledge documents. Acute urticaria has many
causes and is often not allergic in origin. It is frequently
of relatively short duration and easily managed with
antihistamines alone. However, at the other extreme,
causes of chronic urticaria and angio-oedema are
difficult to diagnose and treatment can be complex.
Thus defining the competence required for each extreme
is critical to ensure optimal care. The evidence review
identified that allergy testing and thyroid function testing
were helpful in the investigation of chronic urticaria, that
increasing the dose of antihistamine was effective in
treating urticaria and that ciclosporin A and prednisolone
were effective second line treatments.

Conclusions From the common presentation of acute
(intermittent) urticaria to the uncommon presentations
of chronic urticaria, angio-oedema and cutaneous
mastocytosis, this pathway is a tool to assist health
professionals to differentiate and manage these
conditions.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

INTRODUCTION

Urticaria

Urticaria is a disease characterised by intensely
itchy weals, angio-oedema or both. Three main
clinical patterns are recognised: spontaneous (also
known as ordinary urticaria), physical (including
cholinergic) and contact urticaria. The differential
diagnosis of chronic urticaria includes urticarial
vasculitis and the autoinflammatory syndromes.
These may be hereditary or acquired. Chronic

urticaria is usually defined as continuous disease
activity lasting at least 6 weeks and acute urticaria
as a problem lasting less than 6 weeks. An intermittent or episodic course may be seen in some
patients, characterised by daily or almost daily
weals for a few days or weeks followed by periods
without symptoms.

There is lack of universal agreement on several
aspects of urticaria terminology: the term ‘idiopathic’ urticaria is often used for patients with
chronic urticaria to denote that the cause is not
nown. ‘Chronic idiopathic urticaria’ has been in
use for decades and serves a purpose by emphasising that its aetiology is not allergic even though
the symptoms may be the same as those seen in
immediate hypersensitivity reactions of the skin.
However, there is good laboratory and clinical
evidence for an autoimmune aetiology in around
30-50% of patients who would otherwise be classified as having ‘idiopathic’ disease.! The prevaence of chronic urticaria in children showing a
positive autologous serum skin test,? as a demonstration of autoreactivity, and a positive basophil
istamine release assay,° as an in vitro measure of
istamine releasing autoantibodies, is similar to
that in adults. In recognition that chronic urticaria
cannot be both ‘idiopathic’ and ‘autoimmune’,
there is a weight of European opinion in favour
of using a clinical rather than an aetiological classification. The ‘ordinary’ presentation of urticaria
implies the usual pattern of spontaneous eruptions
of weals, angio-oedema or both, for which an aetiology may or may not be identified. In a recent
consensus paper on the definition of urticaria, the
term ‘chronic spontaneous urticaria’ was preferred
to ‘chronic idiopathic’ or ‘ordinary urticaria’ and
seems likely to become the standard international
nomenclature.* Whether ‘chronic urticaria’ should
be restricted to patients with spontaneous disease
or include those with physical urticaria as well is
also disputed, although the latter seems logical.
Cholinergic urticaria is included as a physical urticaria in some classifications but not in others on
the grounds that it is triggered primarily by sweating, with or without a rise in core body temperature, rather than only application of external heat.

The prevalence of urticaria is poorly documented, especially in children. Historicalestimates
that urticaria occurs in about 25% of the general
population at some point during life are almost
certainly too high. A figure of 8-10% lifetime

 

 

Arch Dis Child 2011;96(Suppl 2):i34—i37. doi:10.1136/adc.2011.214734
Downloaded from adc.bmj.com on October 5, 2014 - Published by group.bmj.com

Original article

prevalence in Europeans may be more realistic.5 Estimates for
the point prevalence of chronic spontaneous urticaria range
from 0.1% to 1.0%.° The proportion of chronic urticaria
patients with predominant physical or cholinergic disease is
in the region of 25%. Chronic urticaria is most frequent in the
fourth decade of life and is about twice as common in females
as in males. Good information on the epidemiology of acute
urticaria is difficult to find, but it is certainly more common
than chronic disease, presenting at any age, and is prevalent
in children, and particularly those with co-existent eczema.
There was no gender bias in a series of 57 children presenting
in infancy and early childhood.” Over half of these cases had
evidence of an atopic constitution. Indeed, atopy appears to be
more common in all patterns of urticaria than in the general
population, except for chronic autoimmune urticaria where
total IgE levels are often lower than expected.

 

Angio-oedema without weals

About 10% of chronic urticaria patients have angio-oedema
without weals.® Most classifications of urticaria now distinguish angio-oedema with weals from angio-oedema without
weals because the important practical implication of this subgroup is that a proportion will have kinin-induced swellings due
to Cl esterase inhibitor deficiency (hereditary or acquired), type
Ill hereditary angio-oedema (HAE) (with normal C1 inhibitor levels) or angiotensin converting enzyme induced angiooedema. The investigation and management of this should
be completely different from the more common histaminemediated angio-oedema (often known as ‘idiopathic’ angiooedema). The prevalence of HAE (types I and II) is in the region
of 1:50 000 of the general population with an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. Both sexes are affected equally.>

Mastocytosis
Mastocytosis is a disorder of mast cells. It is rare and clinicians
are therefore often unfamiliar with it, although it is often
linked with urticaria because of the name urticaria pigmentosa. Patients may present to specialists with diverse symptoms, including skin lesions, anaphylactic reactions and blood
disorders. It is defined by a clonal increase in the number of
mast cells in the body. Clonality is usually assessed on bone
marrow aspirates to optimise the sensitivity of the detection
method, so it is unusual for diagnostic molecular testing to be
performed in children.

Mastocytosis is conventionally classified as cutaneous or
systemic, although it may be difficult to distinguish one from
the other. The term ‘mastocytosis in the skin’ has been introduced for patients with skin lesions who have not been investigated for systemic disease (including bone marrow biopsy),’
which is usually the case in children. Different clinical patterns
of mastocytosis in the skin are recognised, including urticaria
pigmentosa, mastocytomas, diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis
(DCM) and telangiectasia macularis eruptiva perstans (TMEP).
Overlap between patterns may occur. Grouping urticaria pigmentosa with TMEP under the umbrella term ‘maculopapular
cutaneous mastocytosis’ to some extent resolves the difficulty
presented by overlapping clinical presentations but leaves
unresolved whether TMEP should be regarded as affecting a
subgroup of patients with limited cutaneous disease having a
better prognosis than those with urticaria pigmentosa as has
been proposed.!?

TMEP generally presents in adults. The commonest presentation of mastocytosis in infancy is the mastocytoma, which
usually presents in the first year of life and may be present at

 

 

 

Arch Dis Child 2011;96(Suppl 2):i34—i37. doi:10.1136/adc.2011.214734

birth. DCM is exceptionally rare and may present in the neonate with blistering. Urticaria pigmentosa presents by the age
of 2 years in the majority of children.!! The skin lesions resolve
in approximately half by puberty, with notable improvement in
the remainder.'? The proportion of adult urticaria pigmentosa
patients who have or will develop systemic disease over their
lifetime is probably very high, but exact data on this are lacking. Neither are there reliable data on the lifetime prevalence
of mastocytosis. Familial mastocytosis has been reported in
over 50 families,!® but relevant gene mutations have not been
identified and the molecular basis for it remains unknown.

Care pathways

To our knowledge this is the first such attempt to describe the
care for children with either urticaria, angio-oedema or mastocytosis using a national approach. The need and requirement for
care pathways is described separately in this supplement. For
the purposes of the pathway, ‘children’ is an inclusive term that
refers to infants, children and young people (0-18 years of age).

METHOD
The full methodology is outlined separately in this
supplement.'4

RESULTS

The pathway development results are presented in four parts:
evidence review, mapping, external review and core knowledge documents.

 

 

 

Table 1 Key definitions for conditions covered in this pathway
Condition Description
Urticaria Characterised by fluctuating weals and/or angiooedema
Weal Consists of three typical features:

a central swelling of variable size, almost
invariably surrounded by a reflex erythema
associated itching or, sometimes, burning
sensation
a fleeting nature, with the skin returning to its
normal appearance, usually within 1-24 h
Characterised by continuous symptoms that persist
for more than 6 weeks
Characterised by the occurrence of repeated
relapses of urticaria with intervals of at least a week
between each relapse
Characterised by:
a sudden, pronounced swelling of the lower
dermis and subcutis
which is pale rather than pink and may be painful
rather than itching
frequent involvement below mucous membranes
resolution that is slower than for weals and can
take up to 72h
May also involve symptoms of abdominal pain due to
intestinal oedema causing obstruction
Heterogeneous group of disorders characterised by
abnormal growth and accumulation of mast cells in
one or more organ systems
Most children present with maculopapular
cutaneous mastocytosis (urticaria pigmentosa).
Other less frequent forms of cutaneous
mastocytosis are diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis
and mastocytoma of skin*?
The diagnosis of cutaneous mastocytosis in children
is based on typical clinical and histological skin
lesions and absence of systemic involvement

Chronic urticaria

Episodic urticaria

Angio-oedema

Hereditary angio-oedema

Mastocytosis

Cutaneous mastocytosis

 

i35
Downloaded from adc.bmj.com on October 5, 2014 - Published by group.bmj.com

Original article

Evidence review

A total of 390 titles and abstracts were screened by the project
manager and Urticaria Working Group chair (table 1 and figure 1). Twenty-four systematic reviews and/or primary papers
and seven guidelines were identified for appraisal; hand searching the reference lists of appraised papers identified a further
2 papers. The full critical appraisal resulted in the inclusion of
9 systematic reviews and/or primary papers and five clinical
practice guidelines.
The evidence review found that non-allergic hypersensitivity reactions do play a role in children with chronic urticaria.!
ncreasing antihistamine dose was highlighted as a key way
to improve management for urticaria patients.!° The research
also clearly showed the value of second line treatments, such as
ciclosporin A!” !8 and prednisolone.!? The value of allergy testing? and thyroid function screening was also highlighted.° All
aboratory tests should be performed in an accredited laboratory.!§ 21 A full evidence table can be obtained from the Royal
College of Paediatrics and Child Health (RCPCH) Science and
esearch Department.

 

 

 

 

 

Mapping

The RCPCH national care pathway for urticaria, angio-oedema
or mastocytosis can be downloaded from http://www.rcpch.
ac.uk/allergy/urticaria, http://www.rcpch.ac.uk/allergy/angiooedema or http://www.rcpch.ac.uk/allergy/mastocytosis.

External review

This pathway was made available on the RCPCH website
and emailed to a general allergy stakeholder list. A total
of 7/56 of invited organisations responded, providing 49
comments.

 

Core knowledge documents

1. The working group identified key clinical guidance for
health professionals treating and managing urticaria and
angio-oedema (core knowledge documents). These are

as follows:Urticaria‘ EAACI/GA2LEN/EDF _ guideline:
management of urticaria.2?
2. Angio-oedema: the consensus statement for C1 inhibitor
deficiency.®
No core knowledge document was identified
ment and management of mastocytosis.

for the treat
DISCUSSION
The urticaria, angio-oedema and mastocytosis care pathways
have been mapped based on review of the available evidence,
expert consensus and comprehensive stakeholder input. The
pathway is described from the point of first presentation of
symptoms through to the desired patient end point: successful treatment of an acute episode or a plan of management
and follow-up of a chronic condition. This pathway is one of
eight pathways produced by the RCPCH (in press)5 74 25 26;
the purpose and value of these pathways are described elsewhere (in press).!4

Acute urticaria in children is common, affecting around 3%
of children, and is usually associated with a range of infections, allergy or physical triggers such as cold, heat, sunlight
and pressure.?” Most cases are transient and respond to treatment with a non-sedating antihistamine. The pathway aims
to support the management of uncomplicated cases as close to
home as possible, in primary care or at a local hospital. A small
proportion of cases will progress to chronic urticaria, which is
poorly understood in childhood; most information is indirect
being extrapolated from adult data.”7 In children, a significant
number of cases are associated with allergy”? and as many as
30% may have an autoimmune aetiology.® These may require
a more comprehensive approach to diagnosis and management
provided by a specialist centre.

HAE is a rare autosomal dominant condition affecting 1
in 50 000 of the population.”® Forty per cent of patients have
their first attack before the age of 5 years.”? A quarter of cases
occur as spontaneous mutations with no family history, and
the diagnosis is often delayed.°° For the clinician, the significance of angio-oedema presenting without urticaria may be

 

 

 

 

Literature review and expert opinion

 

Titles screened [390]

Stage 2: Titles and eee screened

 

——_——

Si 2:
Syster Review! Stage 2: Guideli:
Primary Evidence [19] araennes (el

|

Handsearching reference
lists of appraised papers <—4—————
[5 guidelines, 7 papers)

Stage 3: CASP Critical
\ppraisal / Data extraction

|

Stage 3: AGREE
Appraisal/data extraction

ee ee ee ee

Include [5G] Exclude {7P} include [12]

Figure 1

136

Exclude {7} Include [9] Exclude {0}

Urticaria, angio-oedema or mastocytosis pathway: methodology of evidence review.

Arch Dis Child 2011;96(Suppl 2):i34—i37. doi:10.1136/adc.2011.214734
Downloaded from adc.bmj.com on October 5, 2014 - Published by group.bmj.com

missed. We have addressed this by describing a separate care
pathway for angio-oedema without weals. Symptoms vary in
requency and severity. Episodes in childhood occur less often
and are less likely to involve laryngeal oedema than in adult
patients.° There is no curative therapy for HAE, so management aims at anticipation, minimisation and early treatment of
acute episodes. At least half of the children with HAE require
long term prophylaxis. Education of patients and their famiies is important and they need ready access to C1 inhibitor
concentrate at hospital or at home and a written management
plan. The specification for specialist services providing diagnosis and treatment of patients with HAE has been described.*!
Each region should have a nominated centre supported by a
multidisciplinary team including an immunologist and specialist nurses. The centre must look after enough patients to
maintain competence in diagnosis and management,®? with
written, shared protocols and management plans. Home therapy, training and testing for relatives should also be provided.
Orofacial granulomatosis has been included in this section
because it also presents with facial swelling. This may be an
isolated condition sometimes know as Melkersson—Rosenthal
syndrome, or may be a feature of Crohn’s disease or sarcoidosis. Diagnosis is based on identifying granulomata in buccal
biopsies. While this condition is clearly not part of the allergic
spectrum of diseases, it is sometimes exacerbated by exposure
to a range of food additives and flavouring agents, notably cinnamaldehyde, which is present in most toothpastes.

Cutaneous mastocytosis presents in childhood with typical skin lesions, and unlike in adults, has a favourable prognosis and usually remits spontaneously around puberty. This is
also described as a separate pathway.’ This is an uncommon
condition, which should be managed ina centre familiar with
providing information to families on the course, prognosis and
complications of this condition.

 

 

Acknowledgements We thank Ms Hilary Whitworth, a PhD student at the
University of Southampton, who provided assistance for the evidence review,
the RCPCH Allergy Care Pathways Project Board who provided guidance and

assistance, and the RCPCH Clinical Standards team for their hard work on the
approval process, in particular Ms Katie Jones.

Funding This project was funded by the Department of Health.

Competing interests CG: CSL Behring, GSK; AL: Stiefel, GSK, Reckitt Benckiser,
Dermal, Leo & Galderma; LW: GSK, MSD; JW: Novartis, Danone, Mead Johnson,
Airsonette, Merck, Allergy Therapeutics, GSK, AstraZeneca. No other members
declared a financial interest.

Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; not externally peer reviewed.

REFERENCES

1, Grattan CEH, Hide M, Greaves MW. Chronic urticaria as an autoimmune disease.
In: Hertl M, ed. Autoimmune Disease of the Skin. 3rd edition. New York, NY:
Springer 2010:349-72.

2. Jirapongsananuruk 0, Pongpreuksa S, Sangacharoenkit P, et a/. Identification of
the etiologies of chronic urticaria in children: a prospective study of 94 patients.
Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2010;21:508-14.

3. Brunetti L, Francavilla R, Miniello VL, et a/. High prevalence of autoimmune
urticaria in children with chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2004;114:922-7.

4. Zuberbier T, Bindslev-Jensen C, Canonica W, et al.; EAACI/GA2LEN/EDF. EAACI/
GA2LEN/EDF guideline: definition, classification and diagnosis of urticaria. Allergy
2006;61:316—20.

5.  Zuberbier T, Balke M, Worm M, et al. Epidemiology of urticaria: a representative
cross-sectional population survey. Clin Exp Dermato! 2010;35:869-73.

Arch Dis Child 2011;96(Suppl 2):i34—i37. doi:10.1136/adc.2011.214734

20.

2

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.
28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

  

inal article

 

Maurer M, Weller K, Bindslev-Jensen C, et al. Unmet clinical needs in chronic
spontaneous urticaria. A GA?LEN task force report. Allergy 2011;66:317—30.
Mortureux P, Léauté-Labréze C, Legrain-Lifermann V, et al. Acute

urticaria in infancy and early childhood: a prospective study. Arch Dermatol
1998;134:319-23.

Gompels MM, Lock RJ, Abinun M, et a/. C1 inhibitor deficiency: consensus
document. Clin Exp Immunol 2005;139:379-94.

Valent P, Akin C, Escribano L, et al. Standards and standardization

in mastocytosis: consensus statements on diagnostics, treatment
recommendations and response criteria. Eur J Clin Invest 2007;37:435-53.
Sarkany RP, Monk BE, Handfield-Jones SE. Telangiectasia macularis eruptiva
perstans: a case report and review of the literature. Clin Exp Dermatol
1998;23:38-9.

Ben-Amitai D, Metzker A, Cohen HA. Pediatric cutaneous mastocytosis: a
review of 180 patients. /sr Med Assoc J 2005;7:320-2.

Carter MC, Metcalfe DD. Paediatric mastocytosis. Arch Dis Child
2002;86:315-19.

Chang A, Tung RC, Schlesinger T, et a/. Familial cutaneous mastocytosis.
Pediatr Dermato! 2001;18:271-6.

Warner JO, Lloyd K. Shared learning for chronic conditions: a methodology

for developing the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health (RCPCH) care
pathways for children with allergies. Arch Dis Child 2011;96(Suppl 2):i1—i5.
Ehlers I, Niggemann B, Binder C, et a/. Role of nonallergic hypersensitivity
reactions in children with chronic urticaria. Allergy 1998;53:1074-7.
Siebenhaar F, Degener F, Zuberbier T, et a/. High-dose desloratadine decreases
wheal volume and improves cold provocation thresholds compared with
standard-dose treatment in patients with acquired cold urticaria: a randomized,
placebo-controlled, crossover study. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2009;123:672-9.
Vena GA, Cassano N, Colombo D, et a/.; Neo-|-30 Study Group. Cyclosporine in
chronic idiopathic urticaria: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial.
J Am Acad Dermatol! 2006;55:705-9.

Grattan CE, O'Donnell BF, Francis DM, et al. Randomized double-blit
cyclosporin in chronic ‘idiopathic’ urticaria. Br J Dermatol 2000;
Poon M, Reid C. Do steroids help children with acute urticaria? Arch Dis Child
2004;89:85-6.

Thomas P, Perkin MR, Rayner N, et a/. The investigation of chronic urticaria

in childhood: which investigations are being performed and which are
recommended? Clin Exp Allergy 2008;38:1061—2.

Levy Y, Segal N, Weintrob N, et a/. Chronic urticaria: association with thyroid
autoimmunity. Arch Dis Child 2003;88:517-19.

Zuberbier T, Bindslev-Jensen C, Canonica W, et al.; EAACI/GAZLEN/EDF. EAACI/
GA2LEN/EDF guideline: management of urticaria. Allergy 2006;61:321-31.

Cox HE, Williams HC, Lloyd K, et a/. Emollients, education and quality

of life: the RCPCH care pathway for children with eczema. Arch Dis Child
2011;96(Suppl 2):i19-i24.

Vance G, Lloyd K, Scadding G, et al. The ‘unified airway’: the Royal College

of Paediatrics and Child Health care pathway for children with asthma and/or
thinitis. Arch Dis Child 2011;96(Suppl 2):i10-i14.

Fox A, Lloyd K, Arkwright PD, et a/. RCPCH care pathway for food allergy in
children: an evidence and consensus based national approach. Arch Dis Child
2011;96(Suppl 2):i25-i29.

Clark A, Lloyd K, Sheikh A, et a/. The Royal College of Paediatric and Child Health
care pathway for children at risk of anaphylaxis: an evidence and consensus
based national approach to caring for children with life-threatening allergies.
Arch Dis Child 2011;96(Suppl 2):i6—i9.

Greaves MW. Chronic urticaria in childhood. Allergy 2000;55:309-20.

Boyle RJ, Nikpour M, Tang ML. Hereditary angio-oedema in children: a
management guideline. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2005;16:288-94.

Agostoni A, Cicardi M. Hereditary and acquired C1-inhibitor deficiency:
biological and clinical characteristics in 235 patients. Medicine (Baltimore)
1992;71:206-15.

Farkas H, Harmat G, Fiist G, et a/. Clinical management of hereditary angiooedema in children. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2002;13:153--61.

Bork K, Hardt J, Schicketanz KH, et a/. Clinical studies of sudden upper airway
obstruction in patients with hereditary angioedema due to C1 esterase inhibitor
deficiency. Arch Intern Med 2003;163:1229-35.

Williams H, Flohr C. How epidemiology has challenged 3 prevailing concepts
about atopic dermatitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006;118:209-13.

Valent P, Horny HP, Escribano L, et a/. Diagnostic criteria and classification of
mastocytosis: a consensus proposal. Leuk Res 2001;25:603—25.

  

i37
Downloaded from adc.bmj.com on October 5, 2014 - Published by group.bmj.com

ADC The RCPCH care pathway for children with
Urticaria, Angio-oedema or Mastocytosis: an
evidence and consensus based national
approach

Susan Leech, Clive Grattan, Kate Lloyd, et al.

Arch Dis Child 2011 96: i34-i37
doi: 10.1136/adc.2011.214734

Updated information and services can be found at:
http://adc.bmj.com/content/96/Suppl_2/i34.full.html

These include:

References This article cites 32 articles, 8 of which can be accessed free at:
http://adc.bmj.com/content/96/Suppl_2/i34.full.html#ref-list-1

Article cited in:
http://adc.bmj.com/content/96/Suppl_2/i34.full.html#related-urls

Email alerting Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article. Sign up in
service the box at the top right corner of the online article.

 

Topic Articles on similar topics can be found in the following collections

Collections ;
Dermatology (268 articles)
Immunology (including allergy) (1401 articles)
Drugs: CNS (not psychiatric) (349 articles)
Notes

To request permissions go to:
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions

To order reprints go to:
http://journals.bmj.com/cgi/reprintform

To subscribe to BMJ go to:

http://group.bmj.com/subscribe/
