ORIGINAL ARTICLE

 

Lack of a Role for Cross-Reacting Anti-Thyroid
Antibodies in Chronic Idiopathic Urticaria

Jonathan D. Mozena’”, Adrienne Tifiana'”, Julie Negri’, John W. Steinke’ and Larry Borish!

The etiology of chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU) is attributed to autoantibodies directed against the a-chain of
the high-affinity IgE receptor (FceRla) or IgE on mast cells in 30-60% of patients. Approximately 30% of CIU
patients have Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT). We investigated the pathophysiologic relationship of anti-thyroid
and anti-FceRla antibodies. Nine individuals with both CIU and HT underwent autologous serum skin testing
(ASST) and sera were assayed for thyroid autoantibodies, thyroid-stimulating hormone, and anti-FceRla
antibodies. Serum samples were studied for their ability to activate a human mast cell line (LUVA) as determined
by cysteinyl leukotriene (CysLT) production. Experiments were performed to determine whether epitope crossreactivity could explain the high incidence of HT found in CIU patients. A significant proportion of CIU patients
had a positive ASST (nine of six) and anti-FceRla antibodies (six of nine). Incubation of patient sera with FceRla,
but not thyroglobulin or thyroid peroxidase, resulted in the decreased ability to detect anti-FceRla antibodies.
Incubation with thyroid antigens did not inhibit CysLT production by mast cells. Epitopic cross-reactivity does
not explain the increased prevalence of HT found in CIU patients. The frequent concurrence of HT and CIU
likely reflects a genetic tendency toward autoimmune diseases.

Journal of Investigative Dermatology (2010) 130, 1860-1865; doi:10.1038/jid.2010.35; published online 25 February 2010

INTRODUCTION

Chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU) is defined as recurrent
episodes of hives with erythema and pruritus occurring over
a period of 6 weeks or longer (Sabroe et al., 1999). CIU is a
common disorder with a prevalence of 0.1% in the general
population (Charlesworth, 2002). In the 1980s, Grattan et al.
(1986) reported the presence of a serum factor that induced
a wheal and flare response following intradermal injection
of autologous serum , thought to be reflective of the presence
of autoantibodies that are capable of inducing mast cell
(and basophil) degranulation. The autologous serum skin test
(ASST) has since been regarded as a reliable in vivo test in
predicting autoimmunity in CIU patients (Sabroe et al., 1999).
Studies have demonstrated that 30-60% of CIU patients
possess IgG autoantibodies directed against the «-subunit of the
high-affinity IgE receptor (FceRla) on mast cells and basophils
(Hide et al., 1993; Fiebiger et al., 1995; Ferrer et al., 1998). An
additional 5-10% of CIU patients reportedly possess autoantibodies directed against IgE (Gruber et al., 1988). Previous studies

 

 

 

‘Asthma and Allergic Disease Center, Carter Center for Immunology
Research, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA

?These authors contributed equally to this work.

Correspondence: Larry Borish, Asthma and Allergic Disease Center,
University of Virginia, PO Box 801355, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908-1355,
USA. E-mail: Ib4m@virginia.edu

Abbreviations: ASST, autologous serum skin test; CIU, chronic idiopathic
urticaria; CysLT, cysteinyl leukotriene; FceRIa, «-subunit of the high-affinity
IgE receptor; HT, Hashimoto's thyroiditis; TA, thyroid autoantibodies; TG,
thyroglobulin; TPO, thyroid peroxidase

Received 14 July 2008; revised 12 January 2010; accepted 13 January 2010;
published online 25 February 2010

1860 Journal of Investigative Dermatology (2010), Volume 130

have demonstrated that IgG from patients with CIU stimulates
histamine release from donor basophils in vitro suggesting a
pathogenic role for autoantibodies (Grattan et al., 1991).
Basophil activation tests have been considered the ‘benchmark’
diagnostic test to identify autoimmunity as the cause of hives in
patients with CIU (Yasnowsky et al., 2006; Greaves and Tan,
2007; Altrich et al., 2009). However, the main limitation to this
approach is the inherent variability of basophils, which requires
rigorous screening of basophils from numerous donors both
to identify “releaser’’ basophils capable of FceRI-dependent
activation (Lichtenstein and MacGlashan, 1986) and also to
ensure that donor basophils do not spontaneously secrete high
basal levels of histamine. In addition, although basophils in vitro
provide useful diagnostic information, CIU is primarily a disease
of cutaneous mast cells. As basophils are not the primary cellular
target of CIU, a mast cell model is the more ideal framework to
study CIU pathophysiology.
We have developed an immortalized human mast cell line
(LUVA) displaying high concentrations of FceRI (Steinke et al.,
2009). These cells are useful in the study of immune mechanisms
of mast cell-dependant disorders such as CIU, insofar as they
degranulate and release arachidonic acid-metabolites in an
FceRI-dependant manner. The LUVA cells are activated when
incubated with CIU serum, and this activation correlates with
the presence of a positive ASST (Tifiana A, Mozena J, Steinke J
Screening for autoimmune mechanisms in chronic idiopathic
urticaria (CIU) utilizing an immortalized human mast cell line
(LUVA), abstract submitted to the American Academy of Allergy,
Asthma and Immunology annual meeting, February 2010).
Thyroid autoantibodies (TA) have a prevalence of
~3-6% in the general population versus ~ 15-30% in CIU

 

 

 

 

 

 

© 2010 The Society for Investigative Dermatology
patients (Leznoff and Sussman, 1989; Turktas et al., 1997;
Verneuil et al., 2004; Palma-Carlos and Palma-Carlos, 2005;
Cebeci et al., 2006). Although these studies establish the
coincidental occurrence of TA and CIU, no current data exist
to determine the basis for this linkage. The confluence of
these two diseases could reflect an underlying genetic
predisposition for the development of autoimmune illnesses.
Alternatively, however, it is plausible that these diseases
are pathogenically linked, possibly reflecting a shared
epitope targeted by these different autoantibodies. Elucidation of the role that TA have in CIU may ultimately help in
understanding the pathologic basis of this condition.

We initiated the current studies to further study the
relationship between the presence of anti-FceRl« antibodies
and TA in patients with CIU. Specifically, we investigated
whether the high incidence of Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT),
defined as the presence of antibodies to thyroglobulin (TG)
and/or thyroid peroxidase (TPO), observed in patients with
CIU could be explained by epitope cross-reactivity of antiFceRla antibodies with thyroid antigens.

RESULTS

Study population

Twenty patients with CIU were enrolled in the study. The
characteristics of patients enrolled into the study are
presented in Table 1 and summarized in Table 2. The
majority of patients with CIU and HT were females
(17 females/3 males), with an average age of 38 + 13 years.

ASST and anti-FceRla antibodies

Thirteen of 20 subjects had a positive ASST. In addition, 12
of 20 patients had positive anti-FceRla antibodies. Nine of
20 patients had both a positive ASST and anti-FceRlo antibodies (Tables 1 and 2).

Thyroiditis prevalence

Nine of 20 subjects were selected for further study based on
screening for the presence of either anti-TG or anti-TPO
antibodies. Six of nine of these study patients required thyroid
replacement therapy, the remainder had euthyroid HT (Table 1).

Epitope sharing between FceRla and thyroid proteins
Initially, a CIU patient who possessed anti-FceRla, anti-TPO, and
anti-TG antibodies was evaluated for cross-reactivity regarding
epitope binding. The ability to detect serum anti-FceRlo
antibodies was inhibited in a dose-dependent manner with
preincubation of the serum sample with increasing concentrations of soluble FceRla. However, neither recombinant TPO nor
purified TG competed with binding to FceRla (Figure 1).
Subsequently, four additional subjects with anti-FceRla,
anti-TPO, and anti-TG antibodies were studied for epitope
inding cross-reactivity using high concentrations of FceRla,
TPO, and TG. The detection of anti-FceRla antibodies by
ELISA was inhibited by an average of 93 11% when these
patient sera were incubated with human recombinant
FceRla (Table 3). However, the ability to detect anti-FceRla
antibodies was not inhibited when sera from the same
patients were incubated with TPO or TG (Table 3).

 

JD Mozena et al.
Thyroid Autoimmunity and CIU

Functional epitope cross-reactivity

As previously reported, serum obtained from CIU patients
induced mast cell activation as demonstrated as cysteinyl
leukotriene (CysLT) secretion (Tifiana et al., 2009). However,
in CIU patients who possessed anti-FceRla, anti-TPO, and
anti-TG antibodies, CysLT secretion by mast cells was not
affected by preincubation with TPO or TG (Figure 2).

Functional antibody-mediated mast cell activation

As expected, incubation with anti-FceRla induced significant
CysLT production. In contrast to TPO and TG, this effect was
inhibited by preincubation with recombinant FceRla (>90%
inhibition) (data not shown). However, incubation with either
anti-TG or anti-TPO induced mast cell activation. In addition,
incubation with TPO and TG did not interfere with activation
of mast cells with anti-FceRla (Figure 2).

DISCUSSION

Consistent with many other autoimmune diseases and similar
to what other investigators have reported (O'Donnell et al.,
2005; Kulthanan et al., 2006), we found that CIU typically
affects females in the third or fourth decade of life (Table 1).
In support of an autoimmune etiology to CIU, an increased
prevalence of HT in patients with CIU is well recognized with
a reported range of ~ 15-30% (Leznoff and Sussman, 1989;
Turktas et al., 1997; Verneuil et a/., 2004; Palma-Carlos and
Palma-Carlos, 2005; Cebeci et al., 2006). In contrast, the
prevalence of TA in healthy control populations is reported to
be 3.3-5.5%. In our CIU population (Table 1), a slightly
higher prevalence of TA was noted (45%).

We confirmed the use of the ASST in demonstrating the
presence of mast cell-activating function in the serum of CIU
patients (Hide et a/., 1993; Toubi et al., 2004; Yasnowsky
et al., 2006). However, a positive ASST was equally prevalent
in patients who did not have TA (67 vs 64%). We also
confirmed a high prevalence of anti-FceRl« antibodies in the
serum of CIU patients as detected by ELISA (60%). However,
similar to the ASST results, an equivalent proportion of CIU
patients with and without TA had positive anti-FceRla
antibodies (67 vs 55%, respectively). Therefore, the presence
of TA does not predict the presence of an autoimmune
“signature,’” specifically the presence of a positive ASST or
anti-FceRl« antibodies. The possibility that a larger sample
size could detect a CIU/HT autoantibody profile that
correlated with the presence of anti-FceRla antibodies cannot
be discounted.

The mechanism by which HT is linked to CIU has not
been elucidated. Concha et al. (2004) demonstrated that 2 of
20 patients with CIU and HT possessed measurable IgE antithyroid antibodies, although this has not been confirmed
(Tedeschi et al., 2001). We addressed the possibility that
epitope binding cross-reactivity could explain the concomitant occurrence of these two autoimmune conditions.
However, this was comprehensively ruled out. Neither antiTG nor anti-TPO antibodies are capable of inducing
activation of connective tissue mast cells (Figure 2). In our
patients with CIU who possessed anti-FceRla, TPO, and TG
antibodies, the detection of anti-FceRla antibodies by ELISA

 

 

www.jidonline.org 1861
JD Mozena et al.
Thyroid Autoimmunity and ClU

Table 1. Characteristics of CIU population

 

Patient Sex Age Thyroid replacement Anti-TPO antibodies Anti-TG antibodies ASST! Anti-FceRla. antibodies”

Thyroiditis cohort
1 B 56 No No Yes Negative Positive
2 F 28 No No Yes Positive Positive
3) Fe 45 Yes Yes No Positive Positive
4 M 65 Yes No Yes) Positive Positive
5 F 40 Yes Yes Yes Positive Positive
6 IF Bo) Yes Yes Yes Negative Negative
i F 61 Yes Yes Yes Negative Negative
8 ip 21 Yes Ves Yes Positive Negative
9 B 24 No No Yes Positive Positive

Non-thyroiditis cohort
10 F 32 = = = Positive Negative
11 F 35 = = = Positive Positive
12 F 61 — = = Positive Positive
13 M Bo) = — — Negative Negative
14 FP Dy, _ _ _— Positive Positive
15 M 47 _ _ _— Negative Positive
16 B 46 — = = Positive Negative
17 IF 27 _— _ _— Positive Positive
18 F 37 = = = Negative Negative
19 iF oe} — = = Negative Positive
20 F 25 = = = Positive Negative

 

Abbreviations: ASST, autologous serum skin testing; CIU, chronic idiopathic urticaria; F, female; FceRlo, a-chain of the high-affinity IgE receptor; M, male;

TG, thyroglobulin; TPO, thyroid peroxidase.

‘Positive ASST defined as wheal >5 mm in diameter more than saline controls.

?Positive anti-FceRle titer defined as >3.9 1g mI-!.

Table 2. Summary of characteristics of CIU population
Age (mean years + SD)

Sex (4 female)

ASST (# positive) Anti-FceRla antibodies (# positive)

 

Thyroiditis cohort (n=9) 8/9
Non-thyroiditis cohort (n=11) 9/11

41416
36410

6/9 6/9
7/11 6/11

 

Abbreviations: ASST, autologous serum skin testing; CIU, chronic idiopathic urticaria; FceRla, a-chain of the high-affinity IgE receptor.

was not inhibited by the addition of TG or TPO (Figure 1 and
Table 3). Finally, when we investigated functional antibody
cross-reactivity, we demonstrated that preincubation with
these thyroid proteins did not decrease the capability of CIU
serum to activate mast cells (Figure 2).

It should be noted that our diagnostic assays for the
presence of anti-FceRla antibodies might exaggerate their
frequency. The recombinant FceRla we used was produced in
a baculovirus cell line that has the machinery to decorate
proteins with N-linked glycans thought to have a role in
protein folding. Many humans possess pre-existing antibodies
to this host cell line-specific glycosylation motif (Hancock

1862 Journal of Investigative Dermatology (2010), Volume 130

et al., 2007). As such, some of the CIU patients in whom we
report anti-FceRla antibodies may, in fact, only have
antibodies to this glycosylation motif. However, our studies
(Figure 1) do demonstrate that this glycosylation motif does
not interfere with the ability of soluble recombinant FceRla to
capture IgE receptor-targeted antibodies. This latter observation validates our reporting the absence of cross-reacting
functional antibodies.

In summary, our data confirm the high prevalence of
TA and anti-FceRlo antibodies in CIU. However, this phenomenon cannot be explained by the presence of a shared
epitope recognized by these two different antibodies.
An alternative explanation for the increased incidence of HT
in CIU is that these conditions reflect a shared genetic predisposition toward the development of autoimmune disease.
Along the same lines, autoimmune thyroid disease also has
a tendency to occur concurrently with type 1 diabetes. This
co-association has frequently been found to occur with
patients who express HLA-DR3, suggesting that their etiology
may involve common genetic factors (Levin et a/., 2004). This
possibly reflects shared thymic-programmed mechanisms for
developing self-tolerance. In summary, our data confirm the
high prevalence of TA and anti-FceRla antibodies in CIU and
strongly suggests that anti-thyroid and anti-FceRla antibodies
do not share epitope specificity.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Patient enrollment

Patients with CIU were recruited from the outpatient adult allergy/
immunology clinics at the University of Virginia. Subjects gave
written informed consent under a protocol approved by the
University of Virginia human institutional review board. The study
was carried out in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki
principles. Subjects were diagnosed with CIU based on the presence
of urticarial lesions of >6 weeks duration who had hives present
at least 3 days per week. All patients had their blood screened
for thyroid-stimulating hormone, free T, (if thyroid-stimulating
hormone abnormal), anti-TPO antibody, and anti-TG antibody.
Patients with significant elevation in circulating antibodies to either

 

 

 

 

£ [FoeRlo] [TPO] ra]
> 6 : :

= s a a vas
B5

ra

3

B4

3

3 3

8

2

£2

&

3

a1

&

3 0

& Serum alone

 

Figure 1. Inhibition assay using recombinant FceRlo, TPO, and
thyroglobulin. Serum from one patient who had anti-FceRla and TA was
diluted 1:50 in PBS containing 0.05% sodium azide and incubated overnight
at 37 °C with increasing concentrations of recombinant human FceRla,
purified human TG, or recombinant human TPO. Titers of anti-FceRlo
antibodies were measured using the methodology described.

JD Mozena et al.
Thyroid Autoimmunity and CIU

TPO (>0.71Uml~!) or TG (>0.61Uml~!) were defined as having
HT and invited to participate in further studies. Patients with a
history of autoimmune disease (other than HT), chronic infection, or
malignancy were excluded. Antihistamines were discontinued for
a minimum of 5 days before skin testing. Patients on immunosuppressive medications (for example cyclosporine, plaquenil) were
excluded, as were patients who had used corticosteroids within the
previous 2 months.

Anti-FceRla antibody assay

Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) with or without 200ngI-! of
recombinant human FceRla (Heska, Fort Collins, CO) were incubated overnight and adsorbed onto sterile flat-bottomed Immulon
2HB 96-well ELISA plates (Beckman Coulter, Fullerton, CA). The
concentration of 200ng|~' FceRla was determined experimentally

300
250
200
150
100

50

Cysteinyl leukotriene production(pg ml-")

 

PBS Anti- Anti- Anti- Anti Anti Serum Serum Serum
Alone TG TPO  FeeRlo FeeRla FoeRla +PBS +TG +TPO
+1G 4TPO

Figure 2. Anti-FceRla functional assay. Comparison of CysLT production
after: (a) activation with PBS, anti-thyroglobulin, and anti-TPO antibodies;
(b) preincubation with thyroid antigens followed by activation with
anti-FceRla; and (c) preincubation with thyroid antigens followed by
activation with patient serum. (a ) LUVA mast cells were activated with PBS,
anti-TG, or anti-TPO antibodies to evaluate if anti-thyroid antibodies caused
mast cell activation. (b) Additional mast cells were preincubated with
recombinant TPO or purified TG followed by activation with anti-Fc eRla. to
determine if thyroid antigens interfere with activation of cells. (c) Sera from
patients with positive anti-TG (n = 8) or anti-TPO (n =5) antibodies were
diluted 1:20 and incubated with thyroid antigens overnight. This was followed
by activation of LUVA mast cells to determine if preincubation with the
thyroid antigens inhibited CysLT production. For all experiments, activation
took place over 30 minutes at 37° C. Supernatants were collected and
CysLT production quantified by ELISA as described. Results presented in
panels a and b were from a single experiment with the LUVA cells and thus
have no error bars, whereas in panel c the error bars represent the standard
error of the mean.

Table 3. Anti-FceRla inhibition assay with FceRlo, thyroid peroxidase, and thyroglobulin

Serum incubated with
recombinant FceRla

Serum incubated with purified

Serum incubated with recombinant

thyroglobulin thyroid peroxidase

 

% Inhibition of anti-FceRla antibody 93 11%

detection (+ SD)

17416 O212

 

FceRla, a-chain of the high-affinity IgE receptor.
*P<0.05.

www.jidonline.org 1863
JD Mozena et al.
Thyroid Autoimmunity and CIU

and found to yield comparable results to higher concentrations.
The next day, wells were washed and blocked with 10% goat serum
in PBS (pH 7.4; Sigma, St Louis, MO) for 4hours. After washing,
plates were incubated with 100! human sera in duplicate diluted
1:100 in PBS containing 5% goat serum at 4°C for 1 hour. Plates
were rinsed before adding biotinylated anti-human IgG 1:10,000
(Rockland Immunochemicals, Gilbertsville, PA) in 5% goat serum
and incubated for 1 hour at 4 °C. After washing, 100 pl of horseradish
peroxidase-conjugated streptavidin (Sigma) diluted 1:10,000 in PBS
was incubated in wells for 20 minutes. The ELISA was developed
with o-phenylenediamine dihydrochloride 0.4mgml~' (Sigma) in
0.05% phosphate-citrate buffer with sodium perborate (Sigma) for
~20 minutes before the reaction was terminated with 3 N sulfuric
acid (after the optical density of the most concentrated portion of the
standard curve was between 1.5 and 2.0 (see below)). Measured
values were translated into antibody concentrations by logarithmic
regression analysis using standardized human IgG (Sigma) directly
adsorbed to the plate (comprising a linear range from 0 to

 

1,000ngml~'). On the basis of preliminary testing performed in a
large cohort of CIU patients (data not shown), a positive anti-FceRla
assay was defined as a concentration of >3.9pgml~!.

Autologous serum skin test
ASST was performed using standard methodology (Sabroe et al.,
1999). Blood was drawn into a glass tube, allowed to clot, and

 

centrifuged at 5,000r.p.m. for 15 minutes to separate sera. Patient
sera (50!) was injected intradermally into the ventral forearm and
compared with saline and histamine controls. Skin tests were read
after 30 minutes with wheals measuring >5mm in diameter more
than saline defined as positive.

Anti-FceRl« inhibition binding assay

Inhibition assays were performed to determine whether a shared
epitope recognized by both anti-FceRla and TA could explain the
igh incidence of HT associated with CIU. Initially one serum
sample from a subject who possessed anti-FceRl«, anti-TG, and antiTPO antibodies was diluted 1:50 in PBS and incubated overnight at
37°C with either PBS, recombinant human FcsRla, human TG
(Advanced Immunochemicals, Long Beach, CA), or recombinant

 

uman TPO (Research Diagnostics, Flanders, NJ) at a range of
concentrations and then assayed for the presence of anti-FceRla
antibodies by ELISA as described. An experiment was then
performed with four representative patients who also had all three
classes of autoantibodies with high concentrations of recombinant
uman FceRlx, TG, or TPO (at 65 pg ml~! each).

 

Anti-FceRlo inhibition functional assay

Serum was diluted 1:20 in PBS and incubated with PBS,
recombinant TPO, or purified TG (65 pgml~' each) overnight as
described for the binding assay. The next day, the serum samples
were incubated with LUVA mast cells at 37°C for 30 minutes and
supernatants collected. LUVA activation was determined as CysLT
secretion as quantified by ELISA according to the manufacturer's
instructions (Cayman Chemical, Ann Arbor, Ml).

Anti-FceRla functional assay
LUVA mast cells were incubated with PBS, and commercially
available anti-TG (Sigma) and anti-TPO (Biodesign International,

 

1864 Journal of Investigative Dermatology (2010), Volume 130

Saco, ME) antibodies for 30 minutes at 37 °C and supernatants were
collected. Similarly, LUVA mast cells
recombinant anti-FceRla (Upstate, Lake Placid, NY) alone and
anti-FceRla after preincubating with recombinant soluble FceRla
(Heska) for In addition,
preincubated with recombinant TPO and purified TG for 15 minutes
followed by incubation with anti-FceRla for 15 minutes. LUVA
activation was determined as CysLT secretion as described above.

were incubated with

15 minutes. LUVA mast cells were

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors state no conflict of interest.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Dr Donald Wassom of Heska Corporation for providing
purified recombinant human FceRlx. We also thank Brandon Early BS,
Lucy Goddard RN, and Elizabeth Kropf BS for their technical assistance.
This study was supported by a grant from the National Institutes of Health
grant Al01793.

 

REFERENCES

Altrich ML, Halsey JF, Altman L (2009) Comparison of the in vivo autologous
skin test with in vitro diagnostic tests for diagnosis of chronic autoimmune urticaria. Allergy Asthma Proc 30:28-34

Cebeci F, Tanrikut A, Topcu E et al. (2006) Association between chronic
urticaria and thyroid autoimmunity. Eur J Immunol 16:402-5

Charlesworth EN (2002) Urticaria and angioedema. Allergy Asthma Proc
23:341-5

Concha LB, Chang CC, Szema AM et al. (2004) IgE antithyroid antibodies in
patients with Hashimoto's disease and chronic urticaria. Allergy Asthma
Proc 25:293-6

Ferrer M, Kinet JP, Kaplan AP (1998) Comparative studies of functional and
binding assays for IgG anti-FceRl« (a-subunit) in chronic urticaria.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 101:672-6

Fiebiger E, Maurer D, Holub H et al. (1995) Serum IgG auto-antibodies
directed against the « chain of FceRI: A selective marker and
pathogenetic factor for a distinct subset of chronic urticaria patients?
J Clin Invest 96:2606-12

Grattan CE, Francis DM, Hide M et al. (1991) Detection of circulating
histamine releasing auto-antibodies with functional properties of anti-IgE
in chronic urticaria. Clin Exp Allergy 21:695

Grattan CE, Wallington TB, Warin RP et al. (1986) A serological mediator in
chronic idiopathic urticaria: a clinical immunological and histological
evaluation. Br J Dermatol 114:583-90

Greaves MW, Tan KT (2007) Chronic urticaria: recent advances. Clin Rev
Allergy Immunol 33:134-43

Gruber BL, Baeza M, Marchese M et al. (1988) Prevalence and functional role
of anti-IgE auto-antibodies in urticarial syndromes. J Invest Dermatol
90:213-7

Hancock K, Someet Narang S, Pattabhi S et al. (2007) False positive reactivity
of recombinant diagnostic glycoproteins produced in High Five™ insect
cells: effect of glycosylation. J Immunol Methods 330:130-6

Hide M, Francis DM, Grattan CE et al. (1993) Auto-antibodies against the high
affinity IgE receptor as a cause of histamine release in chronic urticaria.
N Eng J Med 328:1599-604

Kulthanan K, Jiamton $, Gorvanich T et al. (2006) Autologous serum skin test
in chronic idiopathic urticaria: prevalence, correlation and clinical
implications. Asian Pac J Allergy Immunol 24:201-6

Levin L, Ban Y, Concepcion E et al. (2004) Analysis of HLA genes in
families with autoimmune diabetes and thyroiditis. Hum Immunol
65:6407

Leznoff A, Sussman A (1989) Syndrome of idiopathic chronic urticria and
angioedema with thyroid autoimmunity: a study of 90 patients. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 84:66-71
Lichtenstein LM, MacGlashan DW (1986) The concept of basophil
releasability. J Allergy Clin Immunol 77:291-4

O'Donnell BF, Francis DM, Swana GT et al. (2005) Thyroid autoimmunity in
chronic urticaria. Br J Dermatol 153:331-5

Palma-Carlos AG, Palma-Carlos ML (2005) Chronic urticaria and thyroid
auto-immunity. Allerg Immunol (Paris) 37:143-6

Sabroe RA, Grattan CE, Francis DM et al. (1999) The autologous serum skin
test: a screening test for auto-antibodies in chronic idiopathic urticaria.
Br J Dermatol 140:446-52

Steinke J, Borish L, Tifiana A et al. (2009) Development of an immortalized
stem cell factor (SCF)-independent mast cell line displaying high
concentrations of FceRI. J Allergy Clin Immunol 123:S213

JD Mozena et al.
Thyroid Autoimmunity and CIU

Tedeschi A, Lorini M, Asero R (2001) Anti-thyroid peroxidase IgE in patients
with chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol 108:467-8

Toubi E, Kessel A, Avshovich N et al. (2004) Clinical and laboratory
parameters in predicting chronic urticaria duration: a prospective study
of 139 patients. Allergy 59:869-73

Turktas I, Gokcora N, Demirsoy $ et al. (1997) The association of chronic
urticaria and angioedema with autoimmune thyroiditis. Int J Dermatol
36:187-90

Verneuil L, Leconte C, Ballet JJ et al. (2004) Association between chronic
urticaria and thyroid autoimmunity: a prospective study involving 99
patients. Dermatology 208:98-103

Yasnowsky KM, Dreskin SC, Efaw B et al. (2006) Chronic urticaria sera increase
basophil CD203c expression. J Allergy Clin Immunol 117:14304

www.jidonline.org 1865
