 

 

 

Viewpoints in dermatology e Correspondence

 

Correspondence

Improvement in quality of life impairment followed
by relapse with 6-monthly periodic administration
of omalizumab for severe treatment-refractory
chronic urticaria and urticarial vasculitis

doi: 10.1111/ced.12320

Omalizumab is a recombinant humanized anti-IgE monoclonal that may benefit chronic urticaria (CU).!-*> However,
there is currently little information on what happens to
urticaria after treatment is stopped then readministered for
disease flares, rather than being given continuously. Understanding what happens to patients after withdrawal of omalizumab is necessary to define future treatment protocols.

We conducted a retrospective case note review of 15
patients with CU who received omalizumab under the
asthma dosing protocol for chronic inducible urticaria
(CIndU; n= 8: 6 cholinergic, 1 summation physical, 1
predominantly delayed pressure), chronic spontaneous
urticaria (CSU; n = 6) and normocomplementaemic urticarial vasculitis (UV; n= 1) between 2010 and 2013.
Data were collected anonymously from medical records
by medical staffing in accordance with Guidelines for Good
Pharmacoepidemiology Practices and the ethical principles
laid down in the Declaration of Helsinki.

All patients had severe disease (> 20/30 on the
Dermatology Life Quality Index; DLOI)* and an Urticarial
Activity Score (UAS7)° = 28/42 (CSU only) despite secondgeneration H1 antihistamines at up to four times their
licensed doses and use of third-line immunosuppressive
agents (CSU only), including ciclosporin, mycophenolate
mofetil and methotrexate. Patients were treated with omalizumab in 6-month periods, in accordance with our Trust
guidelines, to assess whether their urticaria had gone into
natural remission or required further treatment.

At the time of data review, one patient had started a
fifth cycle of treatment, one had completed four cycles,
two had completed three cycles, six had completed two
cycles and five had completed one cycle. The intercycle
break varied between 1 and 8 months, depending on the
time taken to secure further funding.

The primary outcome measure was DLOI, as this was
applicable to all types of urticaria. The median baseline
DLQI score was 22 [interquartile range (IQR) = 21-28].
The response to treatment is shown in Fig. 1.

© 2014 British Association of Dermatologists

CHRONIC SPONTANEOUS URTICARIA

 

 

 

 

ttttte

 

 

DSSYSHSSSARRAAAS ASRS RBS ESS SS HSS SS
3 gs ge og oe
g 28 28 2
3 Sg 53 55 38
‘ASSESSMENTS OVER 5 CONSECUTIVE CYCLES
(b) INDUCIBLE URTICARIAS
30
25
2 |
=
8 ie ie?
g
g a a]
? 10
ee
5 ee

 

 

 

 

BASELINE 1 |
‘WasHoUT
BASELINE 2
WASHOUT
BASELINE 3

ASSESSMENTS OVER 3 CONSECUTIVE CYCLES

(c) URTICARIAL VASCULITIS.
30

a

[ASSESSMENTS OVER 4 CONSECUTIVE CYCLES

DLAI SCORES

 

 

 

 

 

BASELINE 1 |

Figure 1 Serial Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI) scores of
individual patients treated with 6-monthly cycles of omalizumab
for (a) chronic spontaneous urticaria; (b) inducible urticarias and
(c) urticarial vasculitis.

Five of six patients with CSU, six of eight patients

with CIndU and one patients with UV all experienced
substantial symptomatic benefit, but also demonstrated

Clinical and Experimental Dermatology 1
Correspondence

marked disease flares on stopping treatment, as indicated by their DLOI The DLOI increased in two
patients with CSU (patients 1 and 2) with subsequent
treatment cycles, reflecting a tendency for patients to
feel more compromised by their illness after experiencing almost complete remission of symptoms during
treatment.

Time to relapse for 11 of 12 responders was a median
of 5 weeks (IQR = 2). The remaining patient discontinued
omalizumab on becoming pregnant; she experienced itching but no weals up to 28 months after treatment cessation, and delivered a healthy child.

Omalizumab was well tolerated. One patient experienced worsening urticaria 30 min after the first injection.
This settled with chlorphenamine, and did not recur with
subsequent injections.

Our data confirm that omalizumab is effective and
well-tolerated in different types of CU. It was also effective
for a patient with UV. However, all but one patient
relapsed after treatment cessation. Symptom control with
omalizumab markedly improved the impairment in
patients’ quality of life (QOL), allowing some to return to
work. By contrast, the symptomatic flares following treatment cessation caused considerable disruption and distress, with a tendency for QOL impairment to be greater
than before treatment. Our data support the use of continuous rather than periodic omalizumab in patients with
severe treatment-refractory CU.

2 Clinical and Experimental Dermatology

A. C. Kai, C. Flohr and C. E. Grattan

Cutaneous Allergy, St John’s Institute of Dermatology, St Thomas’
Hospital, London, SE1 7EH,UK

E-mail: clive.e.grattan@nnuh.nhs.uk

Conflict of interest: the authors declare that they have no conflicts of
interest.

Accepted for publication 2 January 2014

References

1 Maurer M, Altrichter S, Bieber T et al. Efficacy and safety
of omalizumab in patients with chronic urticaria who
exhibit IgE against thyroperoxidase. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2011; 128: 202-9.

2 Maurer M, Rosen K, Hsieh H-J et al. Omalizumab for the
treatment of chronic idiopathic or spontaneous urticaria.
N Engl J Med 2013; 368: 924-35.

3 Kaplan A, Ledford D, Ashby M et al. Omalizumab in
patients with symptomatic chronic idiopathic/spontaneous
urticaria despite standard combination therapy. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 2013; 132: 101-9.

4 Finlay AY, Khan GK. Dermatology Life Quality Index
(DLOI)-a simple practical measure for routine clinical use.
Clin Exp Dermatol 1994; 19: 210-16.

5 Zuberbier T, Asero R, Bindslev-Jensen C et al. EAACI/
GA2LEN/EDF/WAO Guideline: definition, classification and
diagnosis of urticaria. Allergy 2009; 64: 1417-26.

© 2014 British Association of Dermatologists
