doi:10.1684/ejd.2018.3442

Investigative report

Florence HACARD!:?:*
Clemmie MARTIN! *
Virginie VERDU!

Arlette MONTAGNON!
Frédéric AUGEY!

Marion BRAIRE-BOURREL!
Jean-Francois NICOLAS! ?
Frédéric BERARD!:?

Audrey NOSBAUM!?

! Allergy and Clinical Immunology

Department, Lyon Sud University Hospital,

Hospices civils de Lyon, France
2 CIRI, Centre International de Recherche

en Infectiologie, Univ Lyon, Inserm, U111,

Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS,
UMRS308, ENS de Lyon, F-69007, Lyon,
France

* These authors contributed equally.

Reprints: A. Nosbaum
<audrey.nosbaum @chu-lyon.fr>

Eur J Dermatol 2018; 28(6): 823-7

Therapeutic patient education improves
knowledge and skills for patients with chronic
spontaneous urticaria

Background: Therapeutic patient education (TPE) allows patients to better understand their disease and cope with treatment. TPE programmes
have not yet been evaluated for chronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU).
Objectives: To investigate the cognitive and behavioural impact of TPE
on CSU patients. Materials and methods: CSU patients were selected
who completed a TPE programme. A pre-post comparison was performed using a skill/knowledge questionnaire, based on six educational
objectives, before and after the intervention. The course of CSU was
also analysed, according to daily hive count and itch intensity. Results:
All of the 61 enrolled patients improved their knowledge and skills following TPE, with greatest improvement in itch management and use of
alternatives to scratching. CSU activity was reduced at the end of the
programme in 60% of patients. Conclusions: TPE improves knowledge
and skills for CSU patients. Further research is needed to demonstrate
the positive impact of TPE on CSU activity.

Key words: therapeutic patient education, chronic spontaneous
urticaria, knowledge, skills

Article accepted on 14/06/2018

hronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU) is character( ized by the occurrence of itchy wheals and/or
angioedema (itchy wheals, angioedema or both),
lasting for more than six weeks. The quality of life of
patients with CSU is substantially impaired due to its long
duration and changeable symptoms, and severe impact on
sleep, interpersonal relationships, and appearance [1, 2].
Anger, shame, and fear, especially fear of dying from
angioedema, are the most chronic dominant emotions felt
by CSU patients [3]. However, fears are largely misplaced,
as CSU is not a life-threatening disease.
Treatment of CSU is less satisfactory than it could be [4, 5].
Quality of care still depends on the skills of patients for dayto-day management of the disease, in addition to drugs.
Although healthcare providers, in general, and physicians,
in particular, are competent in diagnosis and treatment
choice, they are usually never taught about methods of efficient long-term care. Therapeutic patient education (TPE),
which helps patients with chronic disease to gain skills that
will improve their everyday life, is critical in this process
6].
TPE is a complex intervention involving multiple activities, such as psychological support, hospital and procedural
organization, and health- and disease-related behaviours
7). It allows patients to better understand their disease
and cope with treatment, in order to improve quality of
life and treatment adherence. Unlike TPE programmes for
other pathologies, the development of TPE in CSU remains
poor and its impact has not yet been studied. We decided to
evaluate the impact of TPE on CSU using the educational
programme running in our Allergy and Clinical Immunology Department, dedicated to skin inflammatory diseases

EJD, vol. 28, n° 6, November-December 2018

and accredited by the French Regional Health Agency. We
conducted a pre-post comparison in adult patients with CSU
to investigate whether this educational programme adds
value to knowledge on the disease and its management. The
effect on patients’ skills and knowledge of CSU were measured as primary outcome after intervention. Furthermore,
changes in disease activity and the effect on therapeutic
need were also assessed.

Methods

Patients

An uncontrolled retrospective study was performed from
2014 to 2016. Patients were referred to our department
by general practitioners, dermatologists, and allergologists.
The following inclusion criteria were used:

— having and coping with urticaria for a period of at least
six weeks or more;

— a diagnosis of CSU, as defined by the
EAACI/GA2LEN/EDF/WAO guidelines;

— experiencing failure of dosed-up antihistamines or a poor
quality of life;

— needing to better understand their disease;

— age over 18 years;

— completion of the entire educational programme.

All patients participating in the programme were asked for
their verbal informed consent.

== 823

 

 

To cite this article: Hacard F, Martin C, Verdu V, Montagnon A, Augey F, Braire-Bourrel M, Nicolas JF, Berard F, Nosbaum A. Therapeutic patient education improves
knowledge and skills for patients with chronic spontaneous urticaria. Eur J Dermatol 2018; 28(6): 823-7 doi:10.1684/ejd.2018.3442

 

 

 
 

Intervention: therapeutic patient education

The TPE programme included four steps over six months
[7]. The two first stages occurred during an individual one-hour session, led by a nurse. The first step,
called “educational diagnosis”, was aimed at understanding what the patient already knows, believes, fears, and
hopes for, in order to determine the patient’s difficulties
and resources. In the second step, educational objectives (i.e. the required skills) were determined with the
patient using a skill/knowledge questionnaire (tables /
and 2). This stage establishes which skills the patients
need in order to better manage their disease, according to their difficulties and resources. The third step
concerned the acquisition of skills and knowledge by
the patient. For this step, an individual written plan
of action was developed for patients according to their
characteristics. During this step, health providers used a
number of different educational resources (patient-centred
communication techniques, practical demonstrations, and
educational tools) over four two-hour workshops (figure 1).
Workshops took place with small groups of six to
eight patients and were run by an expert and a group
leader. These sessions involved trained multidisciplinary
caregivers, including doctors (dermatologists and allergologists), nurses, and psychologists. The aim of each workshop
was to establish an interactive exchange between the patient
and the caregiver based on a given theme:

— how to name the disease; triggering factors, treatments,
and side effects;

— pathophysiology and chronic nature of CSU;

— management of itch and alternatives to scratching;

— stress management and relaxation;

— diet balance and dietary recommendations.

The fourth step, following TPE, concerned its assessment
using a similar skill/knowledge questionnaire (table 2).
Biomedical criteria were also recorded during an individual one-hour session, led by the same nurse having assisted
in the educational programme. This programme conforms
to national specifications (article L.1161-2 of the French
Code of Public Health) and was accredited by the Auvergne
Rhone-Alpes Regional Health Agency (validation number:
2010/PPS/ETP/45 19/69).

Table 1. The skills and knowledge evaluated during therapeutic patient education (TPE) for chronic spontaneous urticaria
(CSU), adapted from [7].

 

Objectives

 

Knowledge of
the disease

1. Knowing how to explain the disease and its
mechanism to others
2. Recognize the different lesions

 

Practical skills 3. Knowing how the treatments work and how
to use antihistamines

4. Knowing how to manage a flare-up and
adapting the treatment to disease activity

5. Managing itch and using alternatives

 

Relational skills 6. Knowing how to manage stress, difficulties

and emotions

 

 

 

824 am

Outcomes measures

The primary outcome was to analyse changes in patients’
skills and knowledge after TPE. A pre-post comparison
was performed using the skill/knowledge questionnaires
(table 2). Two questionnaires were completed for each
patient at the second and fourth steps of the TPE programme
by the same investigator. Each questionnaire included six
established objectives, concerning knowledge of the disease and practical and relational skills (table 1) [7]. Each
item was scored on a scale of 0 to 2 regarding the acquisition of skills: 0=not acquired, 1 = partially acquired, an
2=acquired. The mean score was assessed objectively
based on two points, and the total score per patient base:
on 12 points, before and after TPE.

The secondary outcomes were the impact of TPE on disease
activity and therapeutic need. Disease activity was evaluated at each session using the UAS7 (Urticaria Activity
Score), according to daily hive count (0, 1-6, 7-12, > 12) an
daily itch activity (none, mild, moderate, severe), reporte:
by the patient over seven days. According to the UAS7
score, CSU activity was classified as low (<15), moderate
(15-27), or high (>27). We evaluated the therapeutic nee
according to the therapeutic prescriptions of patients. Treatments were classified following the therapeutic algorithm
of EAACI/GA2LEN/EDF/WAO guidelines [8]: no treatment, H1-antihistamines (H1A) as a single dose, dosed-up
H1A (up to four doses), HIA combined with montelukast
(MTK), and other treatments (omalizumab, cyclosporine,
and methotrexate). Disease activity and treatments, before
and after TPE, were compared.

 

Statistical analysis

Data were analysed using Student’s ¢-tests (Prism, GraphPad Inc.). Associations between variables were analysed
using the Spearman’s correlation coefficient. Statistical
t-tests with P values less than 0.05 were considered significant.

Results

Participant characteristics

A total of 1,200 CSU patients were under care in the
department during the survey, of whom 61 patients (5%) followed the entire educational programme. Forty-two females
(69%) and 19 men (31%) were included, with a mean age of
42 years old (range: 23 to 86 years). Distribution of males
and females was in line with the prevalence of CSU among
the European population and mean disease duration was
five years (range: 3 months to 39 years) [8].

Acquisition of knowledge and skills based on
TPE

The TPE programme aims not simply to provide information or advice, but entails the transfer of skills from a trained
caregiver to the patient. To address this, we used an evaluation questionnaire for skills and knowledge, supervised
by a nurse practitioner. The questionnaire was completed
during the one-hour face-to-face sessions before and after

EJD, vol. 28, n° 6, November-December 2018
Table 2. Skill/knowledge questionnaire and its scoring, completed by each patient before and after therapeutic patient education

(TPE), according to the six TPE objectives depicted in table 1.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Questions Level of acquisition
Not In Acquired
acquired progress
How to explain your skin disease and its mechanism 0 point 1 point 2 points
What are the different lesions of CSU? 0 point 1 point 2 points
How to use the treatment and how it works 0 point 1 point 2 points
How to manage a flare-up and adapting the treatment to disease 0 point 1 point 2 points
activity
How to manage itch and use alternatives to scratching 0 point 1 point 2 points
How to manage stress, difficulties and emotions related to CSU 0 point 1 point 2 points

 

CSU: chronic spontaneous urticaria.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Acquisition of skills and knowledge (~ 6 months)
Educational Workshop 1 Workshop 2 Workshop 3 Workshop 4 Evaluation
Diagnosis | How to name the {| Mechanisms and | Management of Stress Skill/knowledge
Skill/knowledge# disease, triggers, | chronic nature of iteh and management, questionnaire
questionnaire treatments cu alternatives to relaxation, diet
scratching balance
Photo
7 . M 9 . ” i ‘.
Educational Hetaplan, Brainstorming Round of sharing expression,
techniques bramnstorming session adeas; relaxation session.
a session : demonstration aan; 7
quiz
Diagram of mast |! Soeescratcing || Se of various
Pedagogic Post-it notes, cell activation, set 8 ‘ .
ss : tools (pebble, pictures, set of
tools card game of pictures, card : , :
massage roller, ice food pictures
game
pad, ete)

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1. Therapeutic patient education (TPE) process for patients with chronic urticaria. Eac!

educational techniques and pedagogic tools.

Table 3. Overall evaluation of skills and knowledge before
and after therapeutic patient education (TPE), expressed as
mean score according to objective, ranging from 0 to 2 for the
61 patients.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Objective BeforeTPE AfterTPE Mean ig
difference

1 0.24 1.67 1.43 <0.0001
2 1.67 2.00 0.33 <0.0001
3 0.65 1.88 25) <0.0001
4 0.34 1.69 35 <0.0001
5 0.34 1.90 1.56 <0.0001
6 0.95 1.80 0.85 <0.0001

 

 

 

TPE. Six educational objectives were scored. The mean
score for each objective significantly increased after TPE
(table 3). The greatest improvement corresponded to objective 5, with a 1.56-mean difference after TPE (P < 0.0001).
This item dealt with the management of itch and its alterna
EJD, vol. 28, n° 6, November-December 2018

 

workshop comprised of specific

tives, for which an entire two-hour workshop was dedicated.
Moreover, the analysis of individual data showed that the
total score for each patient significantly increased after TPE
with a mean difference of +6.754 (6.319-7.18; P < 0.001)
(figure 2). This suggests an individual benefit for the entire
group and progress was seen for all CSU patients. In other
words, each participant improved his/her knowledge and
practical and relational skills.

Reduced CSU activity after TPE

The next question was to assess whether TPE allows for
better control of CSU activity. Three to six educational
objectives (objectives 3, 4 and 5) (table 1) concerned the
therapeutic management of CSU. First, we studied modification of treatments before and after TPE. There was no
change in prescription in 29 patients (48.5%). However,
treatment was reduced in 16 patients (26.7%) and increased
in 15 patients (25.0%) after TPE; the number of patients
taking the different treatments before and after TPE is outlined in figure 3A. As well as H1A, other treatments were
also increased following TPE; 13 patients (21.3%) received

w= 825

 
 

 

 

 

see
n>
107
3-4
a
=
3
S
2
Es
x 67
3
i
2
=
S
Py
EA
z44
3
=
24
0 T T
Before After

 

 

 

Figure 2. Individual evaluation of skills and knowledge before
and after therapeutic patient education (TPE). Results are
expressed as total score per patient, ranging from 0 to 12;
eee P< 0.0001.

immunosuppressive drugs (cyclosporine and methotrexate)
or omalizumab (an anti-IgE antibody) after TPE compared
to four patients (6.5%) before TPE. However, the prescription of these drugs is restricted, and essentially only
available in hospitals. As TPE should not be separated from
drug management of UC, these data indicate a successul partnership between patients and their medical team, to
adapt treatments (objective 4). Furthermore, seven patients
(11.5%) after TPE versus three patients (5.0%) before TPE
had no treatment. Similarly, 13 patients (21.3%) after TPE
versus 10 patients (16.4%) before TPE were treated with
only a single dose of H1A, suggesting that, after TPE, CSU
requires less therapeutic control.

Moreover, we assessed the course of CSU activity over the
period of TPE. Although activity of two patients remained
severe, the change in CSU activity was highly significant
after TPE for the majority of patients (60.6%), with less
patients with moderate and severe symptoms (figure 3B).
Importantly, CSU was completely controlled in 15 patients
(24.5%) at the end of the intervention, versus three patients
(5.0%) before TPE (figure 3C). The disease activity did
not correlate with acquisition of an individual level of skill
or knowledge after TPE; the Pearson’s correlation coefficient was r=—0.17 (P=0.19) between CSU activity and
the total score per patient (data not shown). Since a clinical
improvement was reported in 60.6% of patients and only
nine patients (14.7%) received more intense therapy (introduction of cyclosporine, methotrexate or omalizumab), the
drug effect alone may not explain the overall improvement

 

826

 

EB Before

2B
21 After
204
J 14
1s 1B i4 13
10
10
4
s4 4
0 |
¢

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Patient number

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Yon,

Ss Ca

va
“Pr

B CSU Activity Change
805

60.6%

60-4
wl 344%
204
5.0%
a i

€ CSU Activity

seeker

Patient %

 

 

%,

&
@
&
@

High
Moderate
Low

None

Po cs
cS S

 

 

Figure 3. Evaluation of treatments and chronic spontaneous
urticaria (CSU) activity during therapeutic patient education
(TPE). A) Number of untreated patients and patients treate
with a single dose of H1-antihistamines (H1A), dosed-up
HIA (up to four doses), and H1A combined with montelukast
(MTK) or with other treatments (omalizumab, cyclosporine,
methotrexate, dypiridamole) before and after TPE. B) Change
in CSU activity after TPE. Results are expressed as percentage of patients. C) Disease activity before and after TPE. Each
triangle represents a patient; n = 61 patients; **** P < 0.0001.

 

EJD, vol. 28, n° 6, November-December 2018
in CSU activity (figure 3A, B). Hence, a significant clinical
improvement in CSU was apparent after TPE, irrespective
of the success of drug therapy.

Discussion

The aim of this study was to gain insight into the impact
of TPE on skills and knowledge of CSU patients as well
as CSU activity. According to an analysis based on a
questionnaire, TPE significantly improved knowledge and
behaviour of CSU patients, and was associated with clinical relief. The main gain concerned the management
of itch, allowing for less discomfort. Although effects
of TPE have been previously reported in patients with
chronic inflammatory skin conditions, such as atopic dermatitis, this is the first study reporting such findings in
CSU [6].

A clinical improvement in CSU activity was seen after the
six-month period of TPE intervention. This improvement
may be due to a direct effect of TPE, with better management of aggravating and stress factors, as well as better drug
adherence and therapeutic management. However, a spontaneous remission of CSU cannot be ruled out for some
patients. Indeed, the rate of spontaneous remission of CSU
at one year is approximately 30%. The reported average
duration of CSU is two to five years, and our patients already
had a mean duration of five years for their disease [9].
Further randomized, controlled trials with a control group
without TPE intervention are needed to characterize the
contribution of TPE in CSU control, relative to the natural
course of the disease.

In order for the TPE process to be of high quality, it shoul
include an individual assessment to measure the effects o
the programme. We used a skill/knowledge questionnaire
before and after TPE, which provided important data. However, TPE is complex and has different interlinking parts,
and a large set of criteria would provide a larger amount o:
information about TPE efficacy [7, 10]. Validated quality
of life and clinical scores (using e.g. the Chronic Urticaria
Quality of Life Questionnaire [CuQoL], the Dermatologic
Quality of Life Index [DLQH, the UAS7, and the Urticaria
Control Test [UCT]), appropriate psychological scores, an
an evaluation of medico-economic impact could be of interest [7, 8].
While TPE is a time-consuming and costly process, the
development of TPE for CSU is progressing with visible gains. Recently, counselling activities have been liste

 

EJD, vol. 28, n° 6, November-December 2018

by the Global Allergy and Asthma European Network
(GA2LEN) in the 32 requirements to become a GA2LEN
Urticaria Centre of Reference and Excellence [11]. We hope
that TPE may be added to this list of requirements, once it
is well established and ready to be culturally adapted and
installed on a global scale. Hi

Disclosure. Acknowledgements: Auvergne Rhéne-Alpes
Regional Health Agency. Financial support: none. Conflicts
of interest: none.

Eee
References

1. Choi W-S, Lim E-S, Ban G-Y, et al. Disease-specific impairment of
the quality of life in adult patients with chronic spontaneous urticaria.
Korean J Intern Med 2018; 33: 185-92.

2. Weller K, Maurer M, Grattan C, et al. ASSURE-CSU: a real-world
study of burden of disease in patients with symptomatic chronic spontaneous urticaria. Clin Trans! Allergy 2015; 5:29.

3. Cappuccio A, Limonta T, Parodi A, et al. Living with chronic spontaneous urticaria in Italy: a narrative medicine project to improve the
pathway of patient care. Acta Derm Venereol 2017; 97: 81-5.

4. Irani C, Hallit S$, Weller K, Maurer M, El Haber C, Salameh
P. Chronic urticaria in most patients is poorly controlled: results of
the development, validation, and real life application of the Arabic
urticaria control test. Saudi Med J 2017; 38: 179-85.

5. Maurer M, Staubach P, Raap U, et al. H1-antihistamine-refractory
chronic spontaneous urticaria: it’s worse than we thought — first
results of the multicenter reallife AWARE study. Clin Exp Allergy
2017; 47: 684-92.

6. Pickett K, Loveman E, Kalita N, Frampton GK, Jones J. Educational
interventions to improve quality of life in people with chronic inflammatory skin diseases: systematic reviews of clinical effectiveness and
costeffectiveness. Health Technol Assess 2015; 19: 1-176, v-vi.

7. Barbarot S, Stalder JF. Therapeutic patient education in atopic
eczema. Br J Dermatol 2014; 170: 44-8.

8. Zuberbier T, Aberer W, Asero R, et al. The EAACI/GA(2)
LEN/EDF/WAO guideline for the definition, classification, diagnosis,
and management of urticaria: the 2013 revision and update. Allergy
2014; 69: 868-87.

9. van der Valk PGM, Moret G, Kiemeney LA. The natural history of
chronic urticaria and angioedema in patients visiting a tertiary referral
centre. Br J Dermatol 2002; 146: 110-3.

10. Craig P, Dieppe P, Macintyre S, et al. Developing and evaluating
complex interventions: the new Medical Research Council guidance.
BM 2008; 337:a1655.

11. Maurer M, Metz M, BindslevJensen C, et al. Definition, aims,
and implementation of GA(2) LEN Urticaria Centers of Reference and
Excellence. Allergy 2016; 71: 12108.

== 827

 
