 

Factors that predict the success of cyclosporine

treatment for chronic urticaria
Seth M. Hollander, MD, Shirley S. Joo, MD, and H. James Wedner, MD

Background: Chronic urticaria (CU) is a frequent, difficult clinical problem. When first-line therapy fails, patients are often
treated with alternative therapies that either have a poor side effect profile or little evidence to support effectiveness.

Objective: To describe our low-dose cyclosporine-treated CU population and factors predicting a positive outcome.

Methods: A retrospective chart review was conducted of adult CU patients treated with cyclosporine. Elements of the history,
physical examination, diagnostic testing, efficacy, and side effects were extracted for statistical analysis.

Results: Chronic urticaria was defined as having urticaria more than 3 days per week for 6 consecutive weeks. Sixty-eight
adults with CU who fulfilled the intake criteria and completed a course of cyclosporine were identified. After taking cyclosporine
at an average dose of 1.8 + 1.1 mg/kg, 53 (78%) patients attained complete remission defined as <1 day of hives per month.
Recurrence occurred in only 7 patients; all achieved remission with resumption of cyclosporine. A history of hives (P = .01),
shorter duration of urticaria (mean: 55.2 weeks vs 259.63 weeks; P = .03), and positive CU Index (P = .05) predicted a favorable
response to cyclosporine. Notably, autologous serum skin testing, prior response to steroids, atopic status, or presence of
antithyroid antibodies was not predictive. Male sex and a positive ANA trended toward significance (P = .1). Side effects were
generally mild and seen in 35% of patients; all were reversible by dose reduction.

Conclusion: Cyclosporine is an effective treatment for CU, and a history of hives, shorter duration of disease, and CU index

=10 predict a successful response.

INTRODUCTION

Urticaria is a common disorder, with a lifetime prevalence
estimated to be 12% to 22%.! The prevalence in the general
population is approximately 1%, but this rises to greater than
10% when allergy and dermatology clinics are surveyed.!
Chronic urticaria (CU), defined as hives persisting for 6
weeks or longer, accounts for one third of these cases. In
contrast to acute urticaria, CU can be quite difficult to treat.
Chronic urticaria is much more prevalent in adults than
children and has a nearly 4:1 female-to-male ratio.”

In most case series of CU, 80% to 90% of cases will not
have an identifiable cause, leading to the moniker chronic
idiopathic urticaria (CIU).? However, studies have demonstrated an association between autoantibodies to the a-chain
of the high-affinity receptor for immunoglobulin E (IgE;
FceRIq) in 30%-50% of patients with CIU.* This along with
the coexistence of CU and antithyroid antibodies * has led to
the concept that a large proportion of CIU patients have an
autoimmune basis for their hives. This group of patients with
CU had been called autoantibody-associated chronic urticaria
or autoimmune urticaria.

Affiliation: Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri.

Disclosures: No funding was used for this study, nor do any authors have
any financial relationships with an interest in this subject matter.

Received for publication June 13, 2011; Received in revised form August
22, 2011; Accepted for publication August 24, 2011.

© 2011 American College of Allergy. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

doi:10.1016/j.anai.2011.08.013

Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2011;107:523-528.

Given the presumed autoimmune nature of many CIU
patients, that over 30% of these patients fail a conservative
regimen of antihistamines alone” is not unexpected. When
they do, they often are placed on short bursts of oral steroids
that have many unwanted side effects. In an effort to avoid
steroids, other immunomodulatory medications have been
tried. One of the more common second-line treatments used
is cyclosporine, but few large-scale trials have been conducted to evaluate its efficacy and safety for the treatment of
CIU. We present a retrospective analysis of our CU patients
treated with cyclosporine designed to evaluate its safety and
efficacy as well as factors predicting its success.

METHODS

Study Design

This retrospective chart review included all patients seen in
the Washington University School of Medicine Allergy and
Immunology clinics between January 1, 2000 and April 1,
2010 who had their CU treated with cyclosporine.

Patient Selection

An initial query into the WUMED database included the
terms ‘urticaria,’ ‘hive,’ and ‘cyclosporine.’ The charts that
returned were extensively evaluated to make sure that the
patients had the following inclusion criteria: They had to have
CU as defined as typical hives that are present for more than
3 days per week for at least 6 consecutive weeks. Furthermore, all of those included had their urticaria treated with
cyclosporine and had to be at least 18 years old when their
treatment was started and needed to fail first-line therapy with

VOLUME 107, DECEMBER, 2011

523
antihistamines. Those patients that had less than 2 months of
follow-up, documented noncompliance, or inadequate documentation, such as a missing initial history and physical
examination, were excluded from this review. This protocol
received the approval of the institutional review board of
Washington University in St. Louis.

Methods

Baseline data, including clinical history, laboratory results,
cyclosporine dosing (mg/kg/day), cyclosporine blood levels,
clinical response, and side effects, were entered into a spreadsheet (Microsoft Excel 2010; Microsoft Corp, Redmond,
Washington) for analysis. Baseline clinical data focused on
demographics, urticaria duration, prior treatments, and comorbid conditions. Laboratory results included both skin and
serum tests. When available, autologous serum skin testing
(ASST) and chronic urticaria indexes (CU Index, ViracorIBT Reference Laboratory, Lexexa, Kansas) are included for
analysis. The CU Index is a nonspecific, histamine release
assay in which donor blood cells are mixed with the patient’s
serum as well as positive and negative control serum. The
amount of histamine released from each of these assays is
measured, and an index is reported, with a normal result
being less than 10. Because of this being a retrospective
review, all tests are not available for all patients.

 

Clinic Protocol

Patients with CU were started on cyclosporine at a dose
approximating 1 mg/kg. The dose was increased by 25 to 50
mg every 2 to 4 weeks until either a complete remission was
achieved or a cyclosporine trough was 100 to 200 ng/mL.
Once complete remission was obtained, the dose was held
stable for 6 months and then weaned off. Patients that did not
achieve satisfactory results while having a trough between
100 and 200 ng/mL for 1 to 2 months were weaned off of
cyclosporine and tried on alternative therapy.

Patients were required to attend monthly clinic visits to
evaluate efficacy and safety. Monthly monitoring included
blood pressure, urinalysis, and blood work to evaluate liver
function, serum creatinine, blood counts, and cyclosporine
trough levels. Mild elevations in blood pressure (ie, a systolic
blood pressure <170) were treated with antihypertensives.
Mild laboratory abnormalities (ie, an increase in creatinine of
<0.5 or liver function tests increasing to less than twice the
upper limit of normal) were treated with a decrease in the
cyclosporine dose. Major abnormalities in either laboratory
work or blood pressure resulted in cessation of treatment with
cyclosporine. Subjective complaints were treated with either
a decrease in dose or cessation of therapy, depending on
severity or how bothersome they were to the patient.
Statistics
Using the Analysis ToolPak included in Excel 2010 (Microsoft Corp), the data were analyzed with y? test, F-test,
Student f test assuming equal variances, and Student ¢test
assuming unequal variance when applicable. A P < .05 was
considered significant for all tests. Only patients that com
pleted treatment were included in the analysis except for
safety measurements. Completion was defined as cessation of
cyclosporine for any reason not including being lost to follow-up. Complete remission is defined as 1 day or less of
urticaria per month. All patients that were not in complete
remission, which includes those with no response or a partial
response to cyclosporine, were considered to have failed
treatment.

RESULTS

Baseline Characteristics

Of the 285 patients identified for this study, 106 met the
inclusion criteria, and 68 had completed treatment with cyclosporine for CU as detailed in Figure 1. Of those that did
not meet the inclusion criteria, most did not receive cyclosporine because either the urticaria resolved spontaneously or
it was controlled with other medications such as antihistamines. For those that completed treatment, 53 (78%) were
female and 55 (81%) were white. The average age at first
visit was 40 years, and the average duration of the current
episode of urticaria was 25 months. Further baseline characteristics can be found in Table 1.

Prior Treatments

All patients in this cohort had initially treated their urticaria
with antihistamines; 45 (66%) had partially improved control,
and 23 (34%) showed no improvement. Because of the retrospective nature of this manuscript, no set protocol existed
for an antihistamine trial before cyclosporine initiation, and
often the exact medications were not documented. Fifty-six
(82%) of the patients had tried oral corticosteroids for the
treatment of their urticaria. Of these, 41 were able to achieve
complete, albeit temporary resolution, 10 had a partial response, and 5 showed no response to steroids. Only 1 patient
had taken cyclosporine before, and it was not for urticaria.

Treatment Outcomes

Overall, 53 (78%) of the patients in this cohort were able to
achieve a complete remission on cyclosporine therapy as
defined (Table 2). The average dose of cyclosporine needed

285 Initial Patients Identified

28 Patients with inadequate documentation

35 Patients with poor compliance or not enough follow-up
14 Patients did not have chronic urticaria

102 Patients did not start cyclosporine

179 Patients Eliminated

106 Patients Received Cyclosporine for CU

20 Patients are still receiving cyclosporine
18 Patients were lost to follow-up

68 Patients Completed Treatment

Figure 1. Patient enrollment flow chart. Abbreviation: CU, chronic
urticaria.

524

ANNALS OF ALLERGY, ASTHMA & IMMUNOLOGY
Table 1. Baseline Characteristics

 

CU Patients Treated
with Cyclosporine

 

Total 68
Female (%) 53 (78)
Race (%)
White 55 (81)
Black 3 (4)
Average age at first visit 40
(years)
Average duration of urticaria 25
(months)
Patients with angioedema (%) 40 (59)
Patients with 6 (9)

dermatographism (%)
Reported comorbid
conditions (%)

Any rhinitis 24 (35)
Asthma 9 (13)
Eczema 1 (1)
Food allergy 4(6)

Autoimmune disease 132 (19)

 

Abbreviation: CU, chronic urticaria.
@This included Hashimoto’s disease, lupus, and type 1 diabetes.

to attain complete remission was 1.63 mg/kg. Further dosing
information is displayed in Table 3. In those that achieved a
complete remission, the average time to first effect was less
than | month, and the average time to complete remission
was 20.5 weeks. Of the 53 patients, 21 had a final cyclosporine trough that was below the limits of detection (<50
ng/mL); the median final cyclosporine trough was 112 ng/
mL. Of the 15 that did not achieve complete remission, 11
showed improvement from baseline, and 4 showed no
change.

Forty-eight (71%) of the patients stopped treatment with
cyclosporine because they were in complete remission for at
least 6 months. Only 4 (6%) of the patients had their cyclosporine discontinued because of adverse events. Other reasons for cessation are displayed in Table 2.

Long Term Follow-up
Of the 53 patients that attained complete remission, 48 had at
least 1 follow-up visit after cessation of therapy. As described
in Table 4, the average duration of follow-up to date was 60
weeks. Over this time, there were 8 recurrences of chronic
urticaria in 7 different patients. The average remission duration for those that recurred was 26.9 weeks. All recurrences
were successfully re-treated with cyclosporine, but 3 patients
have remained on cyclosporine in order to retain control. Of
those that were retreated, the time to complete remission
during the second course of cyclosporine was generally
shorter than during their first course, because the target dose
was already known.

Of the patients that did not achieve complete remission, 11
continued to follow-up in our clinic as described in Table 5.

Four continue to have CU. Other potential medications used
in this group include dapsone, zileuton, and hydroxychloroquine. Dapsone improved control in 2 of 9 patients, zileuton
in 4 of 9 patients, and hydroxychloroquine in | of 3 patients.

Predictive Factors

Multiple variables were analyzed independently for their
influence on cyclosporine to attain complete remission in our
patients with CU. Having a shorter duration of urticaria was
found to be predictive in that the average duration of the
current CU episode in patients that achieved complete remission was 55 weeks, compared with 259 weeks in those that
did not achieve complete remission. A history of urticaria,
either acute or chronic, as well as a positive CU Index, were
also found to predict a favorable response to cyclosporine.
Variables such as age, response to steroids, presence of
anti-thyroid antibodies, and ASST results (Table 6) were not
found to be significant. Of note, male sex and a positive
antinuclear antibody (ANA) status approached significance.

Safety

Overall no major cyclosporine-related adverse events occurred. To capture more events, patients that are ongoing or
were lost to follow-up were included in this portion of the
analysis. All events that were recorded were documented to
reverse with either a decrease or cessation of cyclosporine.
The most common side effect was hypertension and elevated
creatinine, which occurred in 16 and 8 patients, respectively.
A total of 37 patients (35%) had adverse events, as documented in Table 7.

DISCUSSION

This retrospective chart review showed that a history of
urticaria, a shorter duration of hives, and a positive CU Index
were each associated with an improved response to cyclosporine for the treatment of urticaria. Based on a thorough
literature review, we are the first to find these predictive
factors.

Table 2. Treatment Outcomes

 

CU patients that
completed treatment with
cyclosporine (n = 68)

 

Level of control attained (%)

Complete remission 53 (78)
Improved, but without complete 11 (16)
remission
No improvement 4(6)
Reason for cessation of treatment
(%)
Complete remission = 6 48 (71)
months
Patient preference 7 (10)
Inadequate response 6 (9)
Adverse events 4(6)
Desire to become pregnant 3 (4)

 

Abbreviation: CU, chronic urticaria.

VOLUME 107, DECEMBER, 2011

525
Table 3. Cyclosporine Dosing

 

Achieved complete Did not achieve complete

 

remission remission
Average cyclosporine dose (mg/kg) + standard deviation 1.63 + 0.86 2.52: 1.65
Average cyclosporine trough (ng/ml) + standard deviation 118 + 52 183 + 159
Number of undetectable cyclosporine troughs 21 3
Median duration of treatment with cyclosporine (mo) + 9.8+7.9 6.9 + 10.1

standard deviation

 

@The average cyclosporine trough was only calculated with those that had a detectable trough.

The finding that a positive CU Index correlates with the
successful treatment of CU with an immune-modulating
agent such as cyclosporine was not surprising. Although no
gold standard has been agreed on for the diagnosis of chronic
autoimmune urticaria, a positive CU Index, which is the
correlate of an anti-FceRI antibody, certainly provides compelling evidence for an autoimmune origin. Furthermore, of
the 27 patients that had an ANA reported, the 6 that were
found to be positive (=1:80) achieved complete remission
with treatment. Of the remaining 21 with a negative ANA, 14
achieved complete remission, and 7 did not. We believe that,
given this trend, a larger population should be studied to
determine the significance of an ANA in the setting of CU.

Surprisingly, ASST was not predictive. Our standard measure of positivity was a wheal 3 mm greater than the negative
control on any dilution, including the final undiluted intradermal test. Given that 55 of 58 patients tested had a positive
ASST by this measure, different positive cutoff levels were
used, including dilutions of 1:10, 1:100, and 1:1,000 for
intradermal testing. Although these cutoffs decreased the
number of positive ASST to 49, 41, and 16, respectively,
none approached statistical significance. The ASST not being
predictive of success in our study likely has to do with the
preponderance of positive results in our cohort, but numerous
other studies have concluded that it may or may not be
associated with treatment outcome, urticarial severity, or
even the presence of urticaria.!°7* As for why we had such a
high rate of positivity to ASST, no obvious answer was
found. Our cohort comes from our tertiary referral clinic
which tends to get more severe and refractory cases. With this
in mind, this could be a case of selection bias. This selection

Table 4. Long Term Follow-up: Patients Attaining Complete
Remission

 

Continued to follow-up 48
Duration of follow-up (weeks)

Mean (+standard deviation) 60.0 + 74.6
Number of CU recurrences 8?
Successful retreatments with cyclosporine 8

 

Abbreviation: CU, chronic urticaria.
2 One patient had two recurrences.

bias could also explain why ASST did not correlate with CU
Index as previous studies have found. Repeat studies including other clinics are needed to further evaluate this.

Our study also builds on the body of evidence for cyclosporine being an effective and safe treatment of CU. Our
overall success rate of 78% is consistent with what other
studies have found, including the study by Kessel and Toubi,?
which reported an 82% success rate when long-term treatment was included. What differentiates the current study
from prior studies is the dose of cyclosporine used. Most
other trials used cyclosporine doses ranging from 2 to 5
mg/kg, whereas we found success starting at a dose of 1
mg/kg and titrating up until a dose resulting in a complete
remission was found. This bottom-up approach and our stringent definition of complete remission might explain why our
patients had a longer time to complete remission then previous studies reported. For those that achieved complete remission, the average dose was 1.6 mg/kg, and 40% had an
undetectable blood level (<50 ng/mL in our laboratory). This
low dose likely led to the paucity of adverse events experienced by our patients, all of which were reversible. We
believe that the high number of patients with undetectable
cyclosporine levels likely had more to do with the inability of
the laboratory to detect low blood levels, as opposed to
patients being noncompliant with their medications. This is

Table 5. Long Term Follow-up: Patients Not Attaining Complete
Remission

 

Continued to follow-up 1
Attained some improvement 8
Attained no improvement 3

Reasons for cessation of treatment
Inadequate response 6
Adverse effects 3
Patient preference 1
Desire to become pregnant 1

Duration of follow-up (weeks)

Mean (+standard deviation) 37.2 + 31.5

Status of chronic urticaria at final visit
Active 4
Resolved 7

 

526

ANNALS OF ALLERGY, ASTHMA & IMMUNOLOGY
Table 6. Factors Predicting Complete Remission of CU on
Cyclosporine

 

Number of

 

patients analyzed P value
Sex 68 10
Race 60 85
Age 68 50
CU duration 68 03°
History of angioedema 58 51
Prior history of hives 62 012
Urticaria responding 68 44
to antihistamines
Urticaria responding 56 86
to corticosteroids
Underlying psychiatric 68 95
diagnosis
Atopic status 35 44
ASST 58 34
ANA = 1:80 27 10
Anti-thyroid antibodies 33 92
Chronic urticaria index 24 .052

 

Abbreviations: CU, chronic urticaria; ASST, autologous serum skin
testing; ANA, antinuclear antibodies.
aValues are <.05 and are deemed significant.

supported by the observation that patients who improved
despite undetectable levels often relapsed when they knowingly decreased or stopped their cyclosporine. Our study
further illustrates that cyclosporine therapy for CU need not
be indefinite, because most of our patients were able to stop
their therapy without recurrence of symptoms.

Although a positive CU index predicted a favorable outcome in 93% of patients, 60% of patients with a negative CU
index still attained a complete remission. Similarly, a history

Table 7. Adverse Events

of urticaria was associated with a 93% success rate, whereas
a negative history was associated with a 67% success rate.
With this in mind, a negative CU index, lack of a history of
hives, and a longer duration of urticaria should not prohibit
the use of cyclosporine.

The major limitations of this study deal with its retrospective design and lack of a standard protocol for working up
these patients. Given that the data are pulled from 10 years of
treatment, testing modalities have changed, and new tests
have become available. As a result, very few patients had
identical workups, and this limited more complex analysis.
Furthermore, although we did have a relatively large population to study, only 24 (35%) patients had a CU index. Given
this small number, the utility of this test for predicting successful treatment of CU with cyclosporine will need to be
confirmed in a larger cohort. Another limitation inherent to
many retrospective studies is the lack of a control population.
Although prior studies have shown that the spontaneous
remission of CU diminishes dramatically as the duration of
disease increases,! our study cannot rule out that spontaneous
remission occurred within weeks to months of starting cyclosporine. In spite of our lack of a control group, we believe
that spontaneous remission does not account for the higher
rate of remission in the group with a shorter duration of
disease (ie, those that had a better response to cyclosporine).
Supporting this is the dramatic response many patients had
within days of starting their treatment. Although they might
not have reached our strict definition of complete resolution,
most did after a few months of dose increases.

Overall, this study shows that cyclosporine is a safe and
effective treatment for chronic urticaria. It also finds that a
history of urticaria, shorter duration of urticaria, and a positive CU index predict a favorable response to cyclosporine.
Given these encouraging results, prospective studies will be

 

Completed therapy
(n = 68)

Lost to follow-up
(n = 18)

Ongoing treatment

(n = 20) Total

 

Objective events
Elevated creatinine 6
Hypertension 12
Rash 1
Active urine sediment 1

Subjective events
Arthralgia
Blurry vision
Sedation
Poor wound healing
Headache
Edema
Fatigue
Neuropathy
Abdominal pain
Diarrhea

ao AR AAA NDA w

ocona
CON

o00-000000
SCCODDONDGCOO=
SAR OS2042NMA5

 

VOLUME 107, DECEMBER, 2011

527
undertaken to better characterize which factors predict success and what the optimal dose of cyclosporine should be for
treating CU.

REFERENCES

1. Kozel MSR. Aetiology, management and current and future treatment
options. Drugs. 2004;64:25 16-2536.

2. Najib U, Bajwa Z, Ostro M, Sheikh J. A retrospective review of clinical
presentation, thyroid autoimmunity, laboratory characte! , and therapies used in patients with chronic idiopathic urticaria. Ann Allergy
Asthma Immunol. 2009;103:496-S01.

3. Champion R, Roberts S, Carpenter R. Urtica
of 554 patients. Br J Dermatol. 1969;8

4. Kaplan A. Chronic urticaria: pathogen
Immunol. 2004;114:465—474.

5. Leznoff A, Josse R, Denburg J. Association of chronic urticaria and
angioedema with thyroid autoimmunity. Arch Dermatol. 1983;119:
636-640.

6. Taskapan O, Kutlu A, Karabudak O. Evaluation of autologous serum skin
test results in patients with chronic idiopathic urticaria, allergic/non
   

aria and angioedema: a review
88-597.
s and treatment. J Allergy Clin

    

 

- Belot V, Desbois I, Martin L, Valat C, Lorette G, Machet L. As

. Alyasin S, Hamidi M,

allergic asthma or rhinitis and healthy people. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2008;
33:754-758.

 
 
 

of the usefulness of autologous serum skin testing in chronic urticaria: a
retrospective -centre study of 74 patients. Ann Dermatol Venereol.
2010;137:444—450.

 
 

 

arimi A, Amiri A, Ghaffarpasand F, Ehsaei M.
Correlation between clinical findings and results of autologous serum skin
test in patients wtih chronic idiopathic urticaria. South Med J. 2011.

 

 

. Kessel A, Toubi E. Cyclosporine-A in severe chronic urticaria: the option

for long-term therapy. Allergy. 2010;65:1478-1482.

Requests for reprints should be sent to:
Seth Hollander, MD

Campus Box 8122

660 S. Euclid Ave.

St. Louis, MO 63110

E-mail: seth.m.hollander@ gmail.com

Answers to CME examination—Annals of Allergy,
Asthma & Immunology, December 2011 Brown TC: The
sting of the honeybee: an allergic perspective. Ann Allergy
Asthma Immunol. 2011;107:463—471.

d

ARN
p> poo

528

ANNALS OF ALLERGY, ASTHMA & IMMUNOLOGY
