Dermatologic and ocular diseases

Effects of complement inactivation and
IgG depletion on skin reactivity to
autologous serum in chronic idiopathic

urticaria

Umberto Fagiolo, MD,4 Franz Kricek, PhD,» Christine Ruf,® Andrea Peserico, MD,¢
Alberto Amadori, MD,‘ and Mauro Cancian, MD? Padova, Italy, and Vienna, Austria

Background: Intradermal injection of autologous serum elicits
a wheal-and-flare response in about 60% of patients with
chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU). This reactivity has been
attributed to the presence of IgG autoantibodies directed
against IgE or the -chain of the high-affinity IgE receptor
(Fe RI_) expressed on basophils and mast cells, leading to the
hypothesis that at least some forms of CIU could be sustained
by an autoimmune process.

Objectives: The aim of this study was to investigate the relationship between the presence of anti-IgE or anti-Fe RI antibodies and the ability to induce wheal-and-flare responses in
CIU sera selected for the capacity to give a positive skin test
response.

Methods: Fifteen patients with CIU and a positive skin test
response to autologous serum were injected intradermally with
native serum and with serum heated at 56°C for 30 minutes
and then adsorbed on Sepharose-protein G to obtain IgG
depletion. Serum levels of anti-IgE and anti-Fe RI antibodies
were measured by ELISA by using purified IgE and recombinant RI -soluble double-fusion protein RI -human serum
albumin-RI_, respectively. The histamine-releasing activity of
sera was tested by using ELISA with whole human blood from
a healthy donor.

Results: All patients had positive cutaneous responses to native
serum injection. Anti-Fe RI antibodies were present in 14 of
15 native sera, only two of which were able to induce in vitro
basophil degranulation. On the contrary, detectable amounts
of anti-IgE antibodies were not found in any serum. IgG depletion by protein G resulted in complete (10/14 samples) or considerable (4/14 samples) removal of anti-Fe RI antibodies.
The two sera endowed with functional activity lost their capacity to trigger histamine release from basophils after heating
and protein G adsorption. Nonetheless, heat-decomplemented/

From the Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, ‘the Institute of
Clinical Dermatology, and “the Department of Oncology and Surgical Sciences, University of Padova, Padova, Austria; and Novartis Forschungsinstitut, Vienna, Austria.

Supported in part by grants from Ministero dell’Universita e della Ricerca
Scientifica e Tecnologica, 60%.

Received for publication Nov 24, 1999; revised Mar 2, 2000; accepted for
publication May 24, 2000.

Reprint requests: Umberto Fagiolo, MD, Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e
Chirurgiche, Universita degli Studi di Padova, Via Giustiniani, 2, 35128
Padova, Italy, fax +(39)049 821 2151; E-mail mcancian@uxi.unipd.it

Copyright © 2000 by Mosby, Inc.

0091-6749/2000 $12.00 +0 1/1/108913

doi:10.1067/mai.2000.108913

IgG-depleted sera elicited wheal-and-flare reactions comparable with those observed with untreated sera.

Conclusions: These results strongly suggest that skin reactivity
to autologous serum could be due to as yet unidentified non—Ig
reactants present in the sera of patients with CIU. (J Allergy
Clin Immunol 2000;106:567-72.)

Key words: Chronic idiopathic urticaria, IgE receptor, autoantibodies, histamine release, cutaneous response

Chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU) is a form of longlasting urticaria (>6 weeks) the cause and pathogenesis
of which are still poorly understood.! In the past few
years, it was observed that intradermal injection of autologous serum elicits immediate wheal-and-flare responses in a variable portion of patients with active CIU.2 The
ability of serum to induce a cutaneous reaction is associated with active disease because it decreases or disappears during remission phases.” These data suggested the
presence of histamine-releasing factors (HRFs) able to
cause cutaneous mast cell degranulation in sera from
patients with CIU. At present, the nature of these HRFs
is controversial.

Several authors described the finding of IgG autoantibodies directed to IgE, the -chain of the high-affinity
IgE receptor (Fe RI_), or both in sera from patients with
CIU.3-7 Subsequent works demonstrated that in some
cases these autoantibodies were able to induce histamine
release from basophils of healthy donors and from isolated mast cells; a role for activation of the complement
pathway was also proposed.3-68-!! It was therefore
hypothesized that skin reactivity to autologous serum
could be due to the presence in sera of autoantibodies able
to activate the cutaneous mast cells. However, although
only a few studies investigated the relationship between
cutaneous reactivity to autologous serum and the presence
of circulating anti-IgE or anti-Fe RI autoantibodies in
the same cohort of patients,>-°8 it is well established that
there is a discrepancy between the numbers of patients
with CIU who have a positive skin test response2-3-6-8 and
those in whom functional anti-IgE or anti-Fe RI can be
demonstrated.3-6!° This observation suggests that at least
in some patients with CIU, the cutaneous response to
autologous serum may be due to non-Ig reactants.

We recently observed that heparinized plasma did not
induce a cutaneous response in patients with CIU com
567
568 Fagiolo et al

Abbreviations used
CIU: Chronic idiopathic urticaria
Fe RI: -Chain of the high-affinity IgE receptor
gahIgG: Goat anti-human IgG
HRA: Histamine-releasing activity
HRF: Histamine-releasing factor
HRP: Horseradish peroxidase
HSA: Human serum albumin
RI -DFP: Double-fusion protein RI -HSA-RI

pared with autologous serum. Moreover, addition of
heparin to sera or adsorption on Sepharose-couple
heparin before testing was associated with loss of cutaneous activity, probably by a direct effect of heparin on
the HRFs present in sera.!2

We therefore hypothesized that HRFs of a different
nature could be present in different patients with CIU or
even in the same patient. To verify this hypothesis, in a
group of patients with CIU and positive skin test responses
to autologous serum, we investigated the relationship
between the presence of anti-IgE or anti-Fe RI antibodies, their functional activity, and the ability of sera to cause
a positive wheal-and-flare response in both native and heatdecomplemented/IgG-depleted sera. Our results disclosed
the presence in almost all native sera of anti-Fe RI antibodies, only a minority of which were endowed with histamine-releasing activity (HRA) on human basophils. Heat
treatment/IgG depletion was associated with abrogation of
the in vitro functional activity, but the sera retained their
ability to induce wheal-and-flare responses. These data
strongly suggest that skin reactivity to autologous serum
could be sustained by as yet unidentified non-Ig factors.

 

 

METHODS
Study population

Fifteen patients with severe CIU and a positive skin test response
to autologous serum (14 women and | man; age range, 19-58 years)
were selected from our CIU patient cohort, which was composed of
132 individuals, 72 of whom had positive reactions to intradermal
injection of autologous serum. The duration of urticaria ranged
from 6 to 48 months, and all patients were under treatment with cetirizine associated in some cases with steroids. At the time of the
study, none of the patients had been given cetirizine during the last
48 hours before testing, and steroid therapy was withdrawn at least
7 days before. All sera were collected and injected during the active
phase of the disease.

Moreover, 10 healthy volunteers from the medical staff were
tested as normal control subjects for skin reactivity to autologous
serum or to heat-decomplemented/IgG-depleted serum.

All patients gave their informed consent to this study. The study
was approved by the institutional review committee for human
experimentation.

Sera preparation

Serum was obtained from venous blood clotted for 30 minutes at
room temperature in silicone-coated Vacutainer tubes (BectonDickinson, Marlan, France) and centrifuged at 350g for 15 minutes.
Sera of both patients with CIU and normal control subjects were
stored at —20°C until use.

J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
SEPTEMBER 2000

Immunoaffinity depletion of IgG

All sera were heated for 30 minutes at 56°C before protein G
adsorption. IgG was depleted from serum samples by incubating 1mL serum aliquots with an equal volume of Sepharose 4B—coupled
protein G (Pharmacia-LKB, Uppsala, Sweden). After 30 minutes of
incubation at room temperature on a rotating platform, the serum
was recovered by centrifugation and stored at —20°C until use.
Residual IgG contents in protein G—adsorbed sera were measured
by RIA! and were found to be less than 10 «g/mL (not shown). As
a control, saline was incubated with Sepharose-protein G and treated as above to exclude the release of skin irritants from Sepharoseprotein G.

Anti-Fe RI antibodies

Sera were tested for the presence of anti-Fe RI antibodies by
ELISA. The extracellular domain of the human Fe RI chain fused
to human serum albumin (HSA) to form the double-fusion protein
RI -HSA-RI (RI -DFP), expressed in mammalian CHO cells,
was obtained from Novartis (Basel, Switzerland). One microgram
of RI -DFP was immobilized in Costar RIA Strip Plate-8 microtiter
plate wells (Costar, Cambridge, Mass) and incubated for 2 hours at
37°C with 100 oL of serum samples diluted 1:50 with PBS/0.05%
Tween-20/2% FCS (Sigma, St Louis, Mo). Bound Ig was detected
by horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-coupled goat anti-human IgG
(gahIgG-HRP; BioRad Laboratories, Hercules, Calif) with the HRP
Substrate Kit (BioRad) for development of the color reaction. The
plates were read at 405 nm, and OD values were corrected for nonspecific binding to HSA-coated wells. Crossreactivity of gahIgGHRP with human IgE was ruled out by solution-binding assays:
human IgE and RI -DFP were incubated at equimolar amounts
(4°C overnight). Formed complexes were added to microtiter plate
wells coated with the monoclonal anti-hIgE antibody Le27 (Ce4specific); captured complexes could be detected with gahIgE-HRP
or gaHSA-HRP but not with gahIgG-HRP. The amount of anti-Fe
RI antibodies was calculated by using polyclonal human IgG
(Sigma) for comparison and then expressed as IgG concentrations
(in nanograms per milliliter).

Anti-IgE antibodies

Determination of the anti-IgE antibody contents in sera was performed an ELISA. Briefly, 1 «g of human IgE (SUS-11, kindly provided by Novartis) was immobilized in Costar RIA Strip Plate-8
microtiter plate wells and incubated for 2 hours at 37°C with 100
aL of serum samples diluted 1:50 with PBS/0.05% Tween-20/2%
FCS. Bound Ig was detected by HRP-coupled goat anti-human IgG
(Fab specific, Sigma) with the HRP Substrate Kit for development
of the color reaction.

Histamine-release assay

Serum samples (1:50 final dilution) were tested for histamine
release on human whole blood from a single, highly responsive,
healthy donor with low IgE levels (<10 U/mL) by using an enzyme
immunoassay (Immunotech International, Marseille, France),
according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

Skin testing

Fifty-microliter aliquots of native or heat-decomplemented/
Sepharose-protein G—adsorbed serum were injected intradermally
into the volar forearm. As a control, the patients were also injected
with 50 «L of saline or saline incubated with Sepharose-protein G.
Skin reactivity was assessed by using a standard histamine prick test
(histamine hydrochloride 1%; Bayer, Milan, Italy). All the injection
sites were scored 30 minutes after inoculation. The largest diameter
(D1) of the wheal-and-flare reaction and the diameter perpendicular
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL.
VOLUME 106, NUMBER 3

300 5
250 |

zg

2 200 |

E]

3 150 J

8

a

= 100 |

Fagiolo et al 569

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

. L l I |
o4 = 4 1 nl 1,
2 3 4 5 6 7

8 9 10 i 12 13 14 15

Patient number

FIG 1. Anti-Fe RI

auto antibody levels in native (black bars) and |gG-depleted (open bars) sera from 15 CIU

patients. IgG was depleted from serum samples by Sepharose-protein G adsorption, as described in the

“Methods” section. Native and IgG-depleted sera were tested for the presence of anti-Fe RI

antibodies by

ELISA. RI -DFP was coated on plate wells, and sera were added at a 1:50 dilution. Bound IgG was detected
with peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-human IgG, and OD values were corrected for nonspecific binding to

HSA-coated wells. Anti-Fe Rl

IgG concentrations were calculated by using human IgG as a standard in a

parallel ELISA with coated anti-human IgG. Results are means of measurements in duplicate.

to this (D2) were recorded according to the following formula: D1
+ D2/2. Reactions showing a mean wheal-and-flare diameter of less
than 0.5 cm were scored as negative. All the skin tests were performed with stored sera (-20°C). The freezing and thawing procedures did not modify the cutaneous reactivity of native or heatdecomplemented/IgG-depleted sera from both patients with CIU
and healthy control subjects (not shown).

Statistical analysis

Data were managed by Statgraphics. The Spearman rank correlation test and the Wilcoxon matched pair test were used where
appropriate.

RESULTS

In all patients the prick test with histamine elicited
positive results, whereas the injection of plain saline
always elicited negative results. When autologous serum
was injected, significant wheal-and-flare responses were
observed in all 15 patients studied (Table I).

None of the native sera showed detectable amounts of
anti-IgE autoantibodies (data not shown); on the contrary, it was possible to demonstrate the presence of variable amounts of anti-Fe RI antibodies in 14 of 15 sera,
ranging from 25 to 255 ng/mL (Fig 1). To rule out interference of serum IgE binding to Fe RI , sera were also
tested at 1:200 dilutions without significant differences
in the anti-Fe RI IgG pattern. Furthermore, preincubation of selected serum samples with an excess of the
mAb BSW17, which is known to inhibit IgE/Fe RI
binding and to displace receptor-bound IgE,!4 had no
effect on the anti-Fe RI IgG readout (data not shown).

No correlation was observed between the diameter of
the wheal-and-flare reaction in individual patients and the
amount of anti-Fe RI antibodies present in serum (7 =
—0.26, P = .33 according to the Spearman rank test). When.

sera were tested for the ability to trigger histamine release
from human blood basophils, only two samples induced
significant histamine release (Fig 2, sera 7 and 15).

To verify whether complement inactivation and IgG
removal were associated with a change in cutaneous
activity, the sera were heated for 30 minutes at 56°C and
then absorbed on Sepharose-protein G. As shown in Fig
1, protein G adsorption resulted in a total or considerable
(samples 1, 8, 10, and 11) removal of anti-Fe RI autoantibodies. Accordingly, the two sera with HRA lost their
ability to trigger histamine release from human basophils
after complement inactivation and IgG depletion (Fig 2).

Nevertheless, injection of treated sera induced whealand-flare responses in all patients comparable with those
observed with native sera (O 2.46 + 0.57 cm vs 2.42 +
0.56 cm; t = 21.5, P = .17 according to the Wilcoxon
test). On the other hand, the injection of Sepharoseprotein G—incubated saline did not evoke any cutaneous
reaction, thus showing a lack of nonspecific skin irritants
in Sepharose-protein G—incubated samples (Table I). The
lack of nonspecific irritants in the treated sera was confirmed by testing the cutaneous reactivity to both native
and heat-decomplemented/IgG-depleted autologous sera
in healthy donors; these tests always elicited negative
results (not shown).

DISCUSSION

In this study we extend the knowledge about the presence of anti-Fe RI IgG antibodies in the sera from
patients with CIU and a positive skin test response to
autologous serum. Moreover, we show, for the first time,
that heat-decomplemented/IgG-depleted sera retain the
ability to induce wheal-and-flare reactions.
570 Fagiolo et al

100 5
90 5
80 5
70 +
60 4

g

2 50 4

2

‘404

E

mx)

= 304
20 4

J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
SEPTEMBER 2000

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

|

 

 

 

 

 

 

7

8

Patient number

 

13

14 15

FIG 2. Histamine release from homologous basophils induced by native (black bars) and heat-decomple
mented/IgG-depleted (open bars) sera from 15 CIU patients. Anti-Fe RI

autoantibodies were detected in all

sera except in sample 2, ranging in concentration from 25 to 255 ng/mL. Residual amounts of anti-Fe RI

IgG were still present in serum samples 1, 8, 10, and 11 after IgG depletion by Sepharose-protein G. Serum
dilutions (1:50) were tested for histamine release by using fresh human blood from a highly responsive
healthy donor by Immunotech histamine ELISA, according to the supplier's instructions. Histamine values
represent whole blood levels (in nanograms per milliliter). Mean values of measurements made in duplicate

are shown.

TABLE I. Skin reactivity to native and heat-decomplemented/IgG-depleted sera in 15 patients with chronic idiopathic

 

 

urticaria*

Decomplemented/ Sepharose-protein
Patient No. Native serum IgG-depleted serumt Histamine Saline G-incubated saline

1 0.7/3.0% 0.7/3.1 1.0/1.2 Negatives Negative

2 0.8/2.5 0.6/2.4 0.6/1.0 Negative Negative

3 1.2/2.6 1.1/2.6 0.4/1.0 Negative Negative

4 0.7/2.5 0.7/2.3 0.5/1.2 Negative Negative

5 1.0/2.2 1.0/2.0 0.6/1.0 Negative Negative

6 0.8/2.6 0.7/2.6 0.7/1.1 Negative Negative

7 1.3/2.2 1.3/2.0 0.8/1.3 Negative Negative

8 1.3/3.0 1.3/2.8 0.6/1.1 Negative Negative

9 0.9/3.3 1.0/3.1 0.8/1.3 Negative Negative

10 1.0/1.6 1.0/1.4 0.6/0.9 Negative Negative

Ll 0.8/1.8 0.9/1.7 0.5/1.4 Negative Negative

12 1.1/1.6 1.0/1.5 0.6/1.1 Negative Negative

13 2.2/3.5 2.0/3.2 0.5/1.2 Negative Negative

14 1.4/2.2 1.4/2.4 0.7/1.1 Negative Negative

15 1.4/3.4 1.4/3.0 0.8/1.7 Negative Negative

 

“Patients with CIU were injected intradermally with native serum, heat-decomplemented/IgG-depleted serum, saline, and Sepharose-protein G—incubated
saline according to the protocol detailed in the “Methods” section. Skin reactivity was assessed by histamine prick test.
tIgG depletion was achieved by incubation of 1 mL of heat-decomplemented (30 minutes at 56°C) serum with an equal volume of Sepharose-protein G for 30

minutes at room temperature.

{Mean wheal-flare diameters are given in centimeters and calculated as described in the “Methods” section.

SMean diameter of less than 0.5 cm.

The finding of anti-[gE and anti-Fe RI autoantibodies in sera of patients with CIU has been repeatedly
reported. Anti-IgE antibodies, isolated?-5 or in association with anti-Fe RI autoantibodies,®-8:!5 have been
detected in a variable percentage of patients with CIU by

several authors, with an incidence ranging from 5% to
69%. In the case series reported here, we did not detect
anti-IgE antibodies, but our results could simply reflect
the small number of patients investigated.

On the other hand, anti-Fc RI autoantibodies were
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL.
VOLUME 106, NUMBER 3

found in almost all the sera examined. Our figures are
higher than those reported by others®.7-!0.16 but comparable with those recently reported by Horn et al.!7 These
differences may be due to several nonmutually exclusive
explanations, including the selection of patients with
CIU, the methods used to detect anti-Fc RI antibodies,
and the means of evaluating positive and negative results.
As far as the first point is concerned, we selected patients
with positive skin test responses to autologous serum, in
which the prevalence of anti-Fe RI antibodies could be
particularly high. The detection method also entails critical issues. Although the basophil histamine release assay
may be considered the method of choice to identify antiFe RI antibodies endowed with functional activity,°8!6
this approach may not be appropriate when the purpose
is to define the actual prevalence of these autoantibodies
in a population. On the other hand, one could also argue
against results obtained by immunoblotting techniques.
n fact, when the subunit of the Fe receptor is blotted,
its conformational structure may be modified, with eventual loss of reactivity of antibodies directed against con‘ormational epitopes. Indeed, Ferrer et al! found a substantial number of patients who had negative test results
by immunoblot but had positive basophil histamine
responses. This apparent discrepancy could also be due
to the working dilution used by these authors to test their
sera, assuming that an arbitrary cut-off dilution to discriminate between negative and positive sera may be
misleading. In our opinion a quantitative descriptive
approach allowing direct comparison of the values
obtained in healthy subjects and individuals with CIU
would be desirable.

In this regard quantitative ELISA assays with a recombinant soluble Fe RI have been reported,?!7 which
exploit the antigen in its native conformation and therefore should be able to detect all anti-Fe RI antibodies
present in the sera. Using an ELISA method with Fe RI
proteins produced in CHO mammalian cells, Horn et al!7
found circulating anti-Fe RI IgG in all 68 patients with
urticaria and in sera from 8 healthy control subjects.
These figures are higher than those reported by Fiebiger
et al,? who used ELISA with recombinant Fe RI
obtained in insect cells, which differs from CHO proteins
in terms of biologic activity.!7 In addition, Fiebiger et al?
assumed cut-off values for normal sera that were arbitrarily chosen to define background levels. In our study
we used a method very similar to that reported by Horn
et al!7 and chose not to use background levels, and therefore the lower prevalence of anti-Fe RI IgG reported by
others may be mainly due to the antigen and the method
used for Ig detection and data expression. In any case the
real prevalence and physiologic significance of antiFe RI antibodies in normal and CIU sera are still an
open question, which may be resolved by careful comparison of data obtained with different functional and
biochemical methods in a large case series of both
healthy subjects and individuals with CIU.

In our study, although all patients had a positive skin
test response, the anti-Fe RI antibody titer varied great
 

 

 

Fagiolo et al 571

ly, and no correlation was recorded between skin responsiveness and anti-Fe receptor antibody titer. Nonetheless, only two sera with a high titer of anti-Fe RI antibodies were able to induce histamine release from
basophils. These findings raise several considerations
concerning the functional activity of these antibodies and
their relationship with the skin response to autologous
serum. The possibility that the in vitro HRA depends on
the amounts of anti-Fe RI autoantibodies is unlikely
because sera with comparable titers of anti-Fe RI IgG
showed a different behavior with respect to basophil
degranulation (Figs 1 and 2). On the other hand, the antiFe RI antibodies could differ in their affinity for a common ligand, recognize different epitopes on Fe receptor,
or differ in the ability to activate the complement pathway, as recently suggested.?.!!

In our study the two sera endowed with functional
activity lost their ability to trigger histamine release from
basophils after heat inactivation and protein G absorption. By contrast, all the treated sera retained the capacity to induce a wheal-and-flare response, thus suggesting
that skin reactivity to autologous serum could depend on
as yet unidentified non-Ig reactants present in sera of
patients with CIU. This idea is supported by our previous
finding that heparin addition to CIU sera or adsorption on
solid-phase heparin before skin testing was associated
with loss of cutaneous activity. !2

Once we admit that skin reactivity to autologous
serum could be due to non-Ig factors, several hypotheses
may be advanced. The possibility that the putative HRFs
act on mast cells rather than on circulating basophils
seems unlikely. In fact, although basophils and mastocytes show many functional differences,!8 Ferrer et al!®
recently found an excellent correlation between histamine release from basophils and cutaneous mast cells
stimulated in vitro with sera from patients with CIU. On
the other hand, non-Ig HRFs could cause histamine
release from skin mastocytes in vivo, although in vitro
they are not able to degranulate basophils and mast cells.
In this regard one could also advance the provocative
hypothesis that the putative HRF could not act on
basophils or mastocytes but directly exert their activity
on the cutaneous microvasculature bypassing these cells.

We thank Dr Rita Zamarchi and Raffaele Bendo, University of
Padova, for their technical assistance.

REFERENCES

1, Champion RH. A practical approach to urticarial syndromes—a dermatologist’s view. Clin Exp Allergy 1990;20:21-4

2. Grattan CEH, Wallington TB, Warin RP, Kennedy CTC, Bradfield JW. A
serological mediator in chronic idiopathic urticaria—a clinical, immunological and histological evaluation. Br J Dermatol 1986;114:583-90.

3. Grattan CEH, Francis DM, Hide M, Greaves MW. Detection of circulating histamine releasing autoantibodies with functional properties of antiIgE in chronic urticaria. Clin Exp Allergy 1991;21:695-704

4. Gruber BL, Baeza ML, Marchese MJ, Agnello V, Kaplan AP. Prevalence
and functional role of anti-IgE autoantibodies in urticarial syndromes. J
Invest Dermatol 1988;90:213-7

5. Fagiolo U, Quinti I, Ossi E, Scala E, Cancian M, Carmini D, et al. Autoanti-IgE antibodies and immunocomplexes in chronic urticaria-angioede572 Fagiolo et al

. Fiebiger E, Hammerschmid F, Sting! G, Maurer D. AntiFe RI

ma syndrome with and without joint symptoms. Giorn It Allergol
Immunol Clin 1991;1:147-51

. Hide M, Francis DM, Grattan CEH, Hakimi J, Kochan JP, Greaves MW.

Autoantibodies against the high-affinity IgE receptor as a cause of histamine release in chronic urticaria. N Engl J Med 1993;328:1599-604

. Fiebiger E, Maurer D, Holub H, Reininger R, Hartmann G,

Woisetschlager M, et al. Serum IgG autoantibodies directed against the
-chain of Fe RI: a selective marker and pathogenetic factor for a distinct subset of chronic urticaria patients? J Clin Invest 1995;96:2606-12

. Niimi N, Francis DM, Kermani F, O’Donnel BF, Hide M, Kobza-Black A,

et al. Dermal mast cell activation by autoantibodies against the high affinity IgE receptor in chronic urticaria. J Invest Dermatol 1996;106:1001-6

autoantibodies in autoimmune-mediated disorders. J Clin Invest 1998;101:243-51

. Ferrer M, Kinét JP, Kaplan AP. Comparative studies of functional and

binding assays for IgG anti-Fe RI ( -subunit) in chronic urticaria. J
Allergy Clin Immunol 1998;101:672-6

. Ferrer M, Nakazawa K, Kaplan AP. Complement dependence of histamine

release in chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1999;104:169-72

J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
SEPTEMBER 2000

. Fagiolo U, Cancian M, Bertollo L, Peserico A, Amadori A. Inhibitory

effect of heparin on skin reactivity to autologous serum in chronic idiopathic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1999;103:1143-7

. Amadori A, Zamarchi R, Ciminale V, Del Mistro A, Siervo S, Alberti A,

et al. HIV-1-specific B cell activation. A major constituent of spontaneous
B cell activation during HIV-1 infection. J Immunol 1989;143:2146-52

. Rudolf MP, Furukawa K, Miescher S, Vogel M, Kricek F, Stadler BM.

Effect of anti-IgE antibodies on Fe RI bound IgE. J Immunol
1996;151:5646-52

. Tong LJ, Balakrishnan G, Kochan JP, Kinét JP, Kaplan AP. Assessment

of autoimmunity in patients with chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 1997;99:461-5

. Greaves MW. Chronic urticaria. N Engl J Med 1995;332:1767-72
. Horn MP, Gerster T, Ochensberger B, Berer T, Kricek F, Jouvin MH, et

al. Human anti-Fe RI autoantibodies isolated from healthy donors

cross-react with tetanus toxoid. Eur J Immunol 1999;29:1139-48

. Charlesworth EN. Role of basophils and mast cells in acute and late reac
tions in the skin. In: Marone G, ed. Human basophils and mast cells: clinical aspects. Basel: Karger; 1995. p. 84-107

 

Receive tables of contents by e-mail

To receive the tables of contents by e-mail, sign up through our Web site at

http://www.mosby.com/jaci

Choose E-mail notification. Simply type your e-mail address in the box and click the Subscribe

button.

Alternatively, you may send an e-mail message to

majordomo@mosby.com

Leave the subject line blank and type the following as the body of your mesage:

subscribe jaci_toc

You will receive an e-mail message confirming that you have been added to the mailing list.
Note that TOC e-mails will be sent out when a new issue is posted to the Web site.

 
