ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Allergy

SKIN AND EYE DISEASES

Coagulation/fibrinolysis and inflammation markers are
associated with disease activity in patients with chronic

urticaria

S. Takahagi', S. Mihara’, K. lwamoto', S. Morioke', T. Okabe”, Y. Kameyoshi' & M. Hide’

"Division of Molecular Medical Science, Department of Dermatology, Programs for Biomedical Research, Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan; 7Department of Dermatology, National Hospital Organization Higashi-Hiroshima Medical

Center, Higashi-Hiroshima, Japan

 

To cite this article: Takahagi S, Mihara S, lwamoto K, Morioke S, Okabe T, Kameyoshi Y, Hide M. Coagulation/fibrinolysis and inflammation markers are

associated with disease activity in patients with chronic urticaria. Allergy 2010; 65: 649-656.

Keywords
chronic urticaria; C-reactive protein; p-dimer;
disease activity; fibrin degradation products.

Correspondence

Dr M. Hide, Division of Molecular Medical
Science, Department of Dermatology,
Programs for Biomedical Research,
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi,
Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.

Accepted for publication 7 September 2009

DOI:10.1111/).1398-9995.2009.02222.x

Edited by: Thomas Bieber

Abstract

Background: The evaluation of disease severity and activity of chronic urticaria
(CU) is essential for the adequate treatment of patients. However, there is no reliable biomarker for such evaluations. Recently, markers of blood coagulation and
fibrinolysis have been revealed to be elevated in severe cases of CU. In this article,
we studied the coagulation/fibrinolysis and inflammation markers and their relationship to disease activity in patients with CU.

Methods: Plasma fibrin degradation products (FDP), p-dimer and serum C-reactive
protein (CRP) were measured with the assessment of disease severity and skin reaction to autologous serum in 82 patients with CU and 37 patients with acute urticaria, idiopathic angioedema (AE) or inducible types of urticaria (IU).

Results: The levels of FDP in patients with CU were significantly higher than those
in patients with IU, but no other differences in FDP, p-dimer and CRP were
observed among patients with different types of urticaria. These markers of patients
with CU were well correlated with each other and significantly associated with
disease severity of CU, but not with skin reactions to autologous serum. In 37
patients with CU, levels of all these parameters reduced as their disease condition
improved, while they increased when the disease became aggravated. Regarding
FDP, this relationship was observed even if FDP concentrations were within normal
range throughout the study.

Conclusions: The measurement of plasma FDP, p-dimer and serum CRP may be
useful for the assessment of disease activity of CU.

Chronic urticaria (CU) is characterized by spontaneously
appearing wheals and pruritus anywhere on the body over
6 weeks or longer (1). As each wheal disappears within a few
hours or a day, physicians may not directly observe wheals,
which may seriously disrupt the daily life of patients. The
EAACI/GA7LEN/EDF guideline recommends to evaluate
the disease activity of urticaria as well as to classify subtypes
of urticaria for its management (2). For the assessment of
disease activity of CU, the guideline proposes a scoring
system based on urticarial symptoms such as wheals and
pruritus (2). However, it largely relies on subjective descriptions by patients, and may not be so accurate and quantitative. Therefore, reliable biomarkers for disease activity of

Allergy 65 (2010) 649-656 © 2009 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

CU should be of great value for proper management of this
disease.

Recently, Asero et al. have evaluated markers of blood
coagulation associated with CU (3-5). They showed that
plasma levels of prothorombin fragment 1 + 2 (PF, +2) and
p-dimer in patients with CU were higher than those of normal controls and associated with disease severity (3, 5).
PF, +» is generated from prothrombin together with thrombin. Once thrombin is produced, it acts on fibrinogen and
generates fibrin, which is then stabilized by factor XII]a
and is finally degraded by the plasmin pathway, fibrinolysis.
The degradation of stabilized fibrin produces fibrin degradation products (FDP) and p-dimer. The activation of such a

649
Activity of chronic urticaria, and FDP, p-dimer and CRP

coagulation cascade is initiated by the tissue factor (TF)VIla—Xa complex. Asero et al. showed the expression of TF
by eosinophils in skin biopsy specimens of patients with CU,
but none in normal controls (4, 6). They argued that the activation of the TF pathway triggered the activation of the
blood clotting cascade, resulting in the production of thrombin and p-dimer in CU (4). The elevation of p-dimer levels
reflects the formation and digestion of stable fibrin, namely
the activation of both coagulation and fibrinolysis (7). On
the other hand, the amount of FDP reflects the degradation
of fibrinogen as well as that of stable fibrin, and therefore
may increase even without the formation of stable fibrin (7).
Thus, a profiling of FDP and p-dimer may reveal whether
the activation of fibrinolysis involved in CU is ‘primary’
without the formation of fibrin clot, or ‘secondary’ and a
compensatory response to the increase of fibrin clot.

In general, coagulation and inflammation are tightly
related to each other (8). For instance, inflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin-6 (IL-6), induce the expression of
TF (9), while TF-VHa complex binds to protease-activated
receptor (PAR)-2 and up-regulates inflammatory responses
(10). Therefore, it is feasible that the levels of C-reactive protein (CRP), a widely used marker of inflammatory responses,
might be associated with disease activities of CU as well as
markers of blood coagulation. In this study, we measured
levels of FDP, p-dimer and CRP in patients with CU at various time points, and studied their relation to each other and
disease activities.

Methods
Patients

Eighty-two subjects (males : females = 22:60; mean age =
39.5 years; range 4-80 years) with CU were studied retrospectively. Chronic urticaria (CU) was diagnosed on the basis of
the appearance of spontaneous wheals anywhere on the body
with or without angioedema for more than 6 weeks (1). We
also enrolled six patients with acute urticaria (AU), 10
patients with idiopathic angioedema without wheals (AE),
and 21 patients with inducible types of urticaria (IU)
{ie., four patients with mechanical urticaria, eight patients
with cholinergic urticaria, one patient with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)-induced urticaria, two patients
with food-induced urticaria, four patients with food-dependent exercise-induced anaphylaxis (FDEIA) and two patients
with solar urticaria]. They were diagnosed on the basis of
clinical history and appropriate investigations, such as physical tests, skin prick tests and/or specific IgE determinations
in their sera (1).

Patients were treated with histamine H,-receptor antagonists (antihistamines) with or without histamine H»-receptor
antagonists, leukotriene antagonists, corticosteroids, and/or
immunosuppressive agents. Twenty-six out of 82 patients with
CU were also treated with tranexamic acid, seven patients
with warfarin, one patient with heparin and 12 patients with
protease inhibitors. Three patients with angioedema and two

 

650

Takahagi et al.

patients with IU were treated with both antihistamines and
tranexamic acid. Patients complicated with diseases such as
myocardial infarction, atrial fibrillation and thrombosis
treated with anticoagulants or antiplatelet agents were not
recruited to this study.

This study was approved by the ethics committee at
Hiroshima University Hospital. All subjects gave informed
consent before participation.

Assessment of disease activity of CU

The disease severity of CU was assessed according to the
mean number of wheals, which had appeared during a week
before blood sampling as previously described (11): 1-10
small (<3 cm in diameter) wheals = grade 1 (slight); 10-50
small wheals or 1-10 large wheals = grade 2 (moderate);
>50 small wheals or > 10 large wheals = grade 3 (severe).
We considered that patients got better or worse if their severity grade had decreased or increased by the second visit.

Measurement of plasma FDP, p-dimer and serum CRP.

Na citrate-anticoagulated plasmas were obtained from blood
collected by venipuncture of cubital vessels. The levels of
plasma FDP and p-dimer were measured with Latex Immunoassay kits purchased from Sysmex co, Kobe, Japan. The
level of serum CRP was measured by a Latex Agglutination
Assay kit purchased from Eiken co, Tokyo, Japan. Normal
ranges of FDP, p-dimer and CRP levels were determined
as <3.3 pg/ml, <1.0 pg/ml and <0.2 mg/dl respectively,
according to the 95% confidence intervals of healthy
Japanese controls provided by respective manufacturers
(FDP: 0.21-3.25 pg/ml; n = 124, v-dimer: 0.051-0.967 pg/
ml; n = 92, CRP: 0.005-0.183 mg/dl; n = 478).

Autologous serum skin test

Autologous serum skin test was performed as previously
described with a slight modification (12), with 50 ul of autologous serum, 20 yl of 10 ug/ml histamine and 50 il of 0.9%
sterile saline. Fifty-two out of 64 patients who received autologous serum skin test (ASST) had not stopped antihistamines, as a result of the restriction by the ethics committee.
Therefore, we determined the skin reaction as positive if the
serum-induced flare diameter was = Smm than saline control
or larger than the flare induced by histamine at 30 min (13).
Although wheal diameter has well been established as a parameter to assess reactions in ASST (12), the margin of wheal
becomes obscure under an administration of antihistamines.
On the other hand, the margin of flare becomes clearer in
spite of the reduction of its size by antihistamines.

Statistics

The statistical analysis was performed by GRAPHPAD PRISM
and GRAPHPAD INSTAT (GraphPad Software, Inc., San Diego,
USA). The statistical significance of difference among two

Allergy 65 (2010) 649-656 © 2009 John Wiley & Sons A/S
Takahagi et al

groups was determined by the Mann-Whitney test or the
Wilcoxon signed rank test. Comparisons of three or more
groups were analysed by the Kruskal-Wallis test, followed
by Dunn’s multiple comparison post hoc test. A P-value of
<0.05 was considered significant.

Results
Plasma FDP, p-dimer and serum CRP in patients with CU

Median concentrations of plasma FDP, p-dimer and serum
CRP in patients with CU were within their normal ranges
{median and interquartile range; 1.50 g/ml (0.95-3.00 pg/
ml), 0.70 (0.40-1.65 ug/ml), 0.10 mg/dl (0.10-0.20 mg/dl)]
(Fig. 1). However, the levels of FDP in 17 of 81 (21%)
patients with CU exceeded the normal range, and 29 of 82
(35%) patients including all 17 patients with elevated FDP
levels showed the increase of plasma p-dimer. The CRP levels
also increased beyond upper limit of the normal range in 17
of 74 (23%) patients with CU, while those in 51 patients
were below the detection limit, namely <0.2 mg/dl. These
three parameters in patients with CU significantly correlated
to each other (Fig. 2).

Based on the scale of disease severity, 47 of 82 patients
with CU were evaluated as severe, 15 as moderate and 20 as
slight. Patients with severe urticaria displayed significantly
higher levels of FDP, p-dimer and CRP than patients with
moderate and slight disease (Fig. 3). Regarding responses to
autologous sera, we could not find significant differences
between the autologous serum skin test (ASST) positive
group and the negative group in terms of the levels of FDP,
p-dimer and CRP (Fig. S1).

Some patients with AU, AE or IU also exhibited an elevation of FDP, p-dimer and CRP as patients with CU (Fig. 1).

FDP
20

15

S

@
3
3
&
3
a

FDP (ug/ml)

cU AU AE IU cu AU
n=81 n=5 n=10 n=21 n=82

Figure 1 Levels of plasma fibrin degradation products (FDP),
o-dimer and serum C-reactive protein (CRP) in patients with chronic
urticaria (CU) and patients with acute urticaria (AU), idiopathic
angioedema (AE) or inducible types of urticaria (IU). Median concentrations of FDP, o-dimer and CRP in patients with CU were not

Allergy 65 (2010) 649-656 © 2009 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

D-dimer

 

n=6 n=10

Activity of chronic urticaria, and FDP, p-dimer and CRP.

Levels of FDP in patients with IU were significantly lower
than those in patients with CU, but otherwise, no difference
was observed among patients with subtypes of urticaria.
Inducible types of urticaria (IUs) of patients with high levels
of FDP or p-dimer were mechanical urticaria, cholinergic
urticaria, solar urticaria, and FDEIA.

Relationship of clinical disease activity to FDP, p-dimer and
CRP

Levels of FDP, p-dimer and CRP of 37 patients with CU
were measured with the evaluation of their disease severities
before and after treatments in our hospital. The median
duration between two visits was 29.0 days (interquartile
range; 21.0-64.0 days).

We observed a significant reduction of FDP, p-dimer and
CRP levels when the disease severity improved (Fig. 4A),
while these parameters significantly increased when the disease became worse (Fig. 4B). It is noteworthy that FDP
levels increased and decreased in accordance with the exacerbation and relief of symptoms even within the normal range
(Fig. 5).

Discussion

In this study, we have demonstrated that levels of FDP,
p-dimer and CRP were elevated in patients with severe CU
and that they might have been associated not only with
disease ‘severity’ among patients, but also with disease ‘activity’ of CU in each patient.

The levels of plasma p-dimer in 29 (35%) out of 82
patients with CU were higher than the normal range, indicating the production and degradation of stable fibrin by the
activation of coagulation and fibrinolysis in CU. This result

CRP

CRP (mg/dl)

 

AE lu cu AU AE IU
n=21 n=74 n=6

significantly different from those in patients with AU, AE or IU,
except for FDP in patients with IU which were significantly lower
than those in patients with CU. (Horizontal solid lines and broken
lines represent median values and upper limits of normal for parameters, respectively.).

651
Activity of chronic urticaria, and FDP, p-dimer and CRP

      
  

 

 

15
.
E10
7
£
4
5 ° n=81
y = 0.658x - 0.1947
R2 = 0.9399
P¢0.01
0!
0 5 10 15 20
FDP (ug/ml)
4
. n=73
3 y = 0.0785x + 0.1055
= R2= 0.2424
FE P<0.01
B2 .
1s}

 

 

 

0 5 10 15 20
FDP (ug/ml)

Takahagi et al.

4
- n=74
y = 0.1166x + 0.1359
3 R2= 0.2255
P<0.01

5

 

 

 

0 5 10 18
D-dimer (ug/ml)

Figure 2 Relationship among levels of plasma FDP, p-dimer and serum CRP in patients with CU. Regression analysis revealed that these

three parameters correlated with each other.

supports the suggestion by Asero et al. that the activation of
coagulation is involved in the pathogenesis of CU (3-5).
Although they reported that plasma from only two of 21
(10%) patients with CU showed the increase of p-dimer level
(4), our study revealed that 35% of patients with CU displayed elevated levels of p-dimer. However, the former study
included only three patients with severe urticaria among 37
total patients. On the other hand, urticaria in 47 out of 82
patients in this study was severe. Moreover, levels of plasma
p-dimer of patients with severe CU were significantly higher
than those of patients with moderate/slight CU, in agreement
with the finding by Asero et al. that levels of p-dimer correlated to disease severity of CU (5). Therefore, the difference
of the levels of p-dimer between the two studies may be as a
result of the difference of severity of urticaria in patients
recruited in each study.

Serum CRP levels were higher than the normal range in 17
(23%) out of 74 patients with CU and significantly correlated
with levels of FDP and p-dimer. Three (50%) of six patients
with AU also showed an increased levels of CRP. The production of many acute-phase proteins, including CRP, was
stimulated by interleukin-6 (IL-6), and Kasperska-Zajac et al.
(14) reported that patients with CU showed higher levels of
IL-6 than those in healthy controls. Moreover, Fujii et al.
(15) showed the increase of both plasma IL-6 and serum
CRP in patients with severe AU, who were refractory to
antihistamines and required corticosteroids. Thus, certain

 

652

populations with severe idiopathic urticaria may show the
increase of CRP caused by IL-6. The correlation between
CRP and coagulation markers suggests an interrelation
between inflammation and coagulation in the pathogenesis of
CU. Cugno et al. reported that eosinophils expressed TF in
patients with CU, which could be induced by IL-6 and act as
an initiator of coagulation cascade (4, 6, 8).

The assessment of disease ‘severity’ and ‘activity’ of CU
are important processes in the management of CU. Various
symptom-scoring systems have been employed to evaluate
disease ‘activity’ in the time course of CU and several biomarkers have been suggested to reflect disease ‘severity’ of
urticaria (16). Tedeschi et al. (17) reported that serum IL-18
was associated with disease ‘severity’ in patients with ASSTpositive CU. Asero et al. revealed that PF, . and p-dimer
correlated with disease ‘severity’ in patients with CU (5).
They also found the association between disease ‘activity’
and PF, +, and p-dimer in two followed-up patients, suggesting that coagulation markers may be useful for monitoring
disease ‘activity’. In this study, we have demonstrated that
levels of FDP, p-dimer and CRP significantly correlated with
disease ‘activity’ in patients with CU in the course of individual patients. The increase of p-dimer was observed in 35%
of patients with CU, whereas that of FDP and CRP was
found in only 21% and 23% of patients respectively. In all
patients with elevated FDP, levels of p-dimer were also
higher than the normal range, suggesting that p-dimer is

Allergy 65 (2010) 649-656 © 2009 John Wiley & Sons A/S
Takahagi et al

Activity of chronic urticaria, and FDP, p-dimer and CRP.

D-dimer CRP
20 15 4
P¢0.01 P<0.01
a |
15 3
=
q 10
=
ie 2 S
2 : >
~~ 10 8 E2
A 3
R 5 Fe
1S)
5
5 1
0. 0 0

 

Severe

n=47

Moderate/slight
n=34

Severe

n=47

Figure 3 Levels of plasma FDP, p-dimer and serum CRP in patients
with severe CU and patients with moderate/slight CU. Patients with
severe CU displayed higher levels of FDP, p-dimer and CRP than

superior to FDP and CRP in terms of sensitivity. On the
other hand, the level of FDP correlated well with disease
‘activity’ even when it dropped within the normal range.
Taken together, p-dimer may be the most sensitive biomarker
to detect the abnormality of the coagulation in patients with
CU, and FDP may be the most useful biomarker to evaluate
disease ‘activity’ among these biomarkers.

Our observation that the sensitivity of p-dimer to detect
urticarial conditions is better than that of FDP, suggests
that the increase of stable fibrin degradation (the ‘secondary’
fibrinolysis) is more characteristic to CU than that of whole
fibrinolysis. However, the better correlation of FDP levels to
disease activities than levels of p-dimer suggests that the
‘primary’ fibrinolysis rather than the formation of stable
fibrin is more closely associated with the pathogenesis of
CU. Asero etal. have suggested that the formation of
thrombin by blood coagulation may induce dermal edema
through an increase in vascular permeability and generate
CSa leading to mast cell degranulation, which is critical in
the pathomechanism of urticaria (18). However, it has not
been clear whether the increase of coagulation and/or fibrinolysis are the primary cause of wheal formation or the
secondary events by histamine release or other reactions of
mast cells in CU. The former possibility is supported by
findings that anticoagulants such as warfarin and heparin
relieved symptoms of some patients in CU (19, 20). On the
other hand, some patients with AU, AE or IU also exhibited an elevation of plasma FDP, p-dimer and serum CRP
as did patients with CU. We could not find significant
differences in levels of FDP and p-dimer among patients

Allergy 65 (2010) 649-656 © 2009 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

 

 

Severe

n=43

Moderate/slight

Moderate/slight
n=31

n=35

patients with moderate/slight CU. (Horizontal solid lines and broken
lines represent median values and upper limits of normal for parameters respectively.).

with CU, with AU and with AE. Fujii et al. also reported
the elevation of plasma p-dimer in patients with severe
AU (21). These observations suggest that the activation of
coagulation cascade is rather a common phenomenon in
urticaria than specific to CU, and therefore might be a
secondary event caused by the activation of mast cells.
However, levels of FDP and p-dimer were not correlated
with plasma histamine concentrations in patients with CU
(data not shown). Moreover, levels of FDP in patients with
CU were significantly higher than those in patients with IU.
Therefore, these parameters may be more closely associated
with a condition that predisposes to spontaneous wheal
formation than a transient condition or the sensitization to
specific stimuli. We should keep in mind that levels of FDP,
p-dimer and CRP might be directly affected by medications,
such as tranexamic acid, warfarin and corticosteroids, which
were administered to patients in this study. However,
some patients showed increase of FDP, p-dimer and/or CRP
without a change of such medications. Moreover, the administration of a drug to different patients resulted in either the
increase or the decrease of FDP and/or p-dimer levels.
Further studies without the use of these drugs may reveal
more clear relationships between urticarial disease activities
and these parameters.

Regarding autoantibodies that activate mast cells in the
pathogenesis of CU, we could not find any relationship
between cutaneous responses to ASST and levels of FDP,
p-dimer and CRP. Results of ASST performed in this study
under the use of antihistamines might underestimate skin
reactions to autoantibodies, as only 18 out of 64 (28.1%) were

653
Activity of chronic urticaria, and FDP, p-dimer and CRP

FDP
9,  P<0.01

Bes)

s q

=

$0 3

a E

[= ba
a

 

FDP (ug/ml)

D-dimer (ug/ml)

 

@ &

n=27
Figure 4 Relationship between disease activity of CU and levels of
plasma FDP, o-dimer and serum CRP. A and B represent levels of
FDP, p-dimer and CRP before and after a subsidence and an
exacerbation of CU, respectively. Levels of FDP, o-dimer and CRP.

determined as positive by this test. Moreover, no significant
relationship was found between results of ASST and urticarial
disease severities of the patients (Fisher’s exact test;
P = 0.78), not as previously reported (22, 23). Indeed, the

654

 

D-dimer
P<0.01

 

Takahagi et al.

D-dimer

CRP (mg/dl)
N

 

CRP (mg/dl)

 

were significantly reduced when the disease severity improved (A),
while all parameters significantly increased when disease became
worse (B). (Horizontal broken lines represent upper limits of normal
for parameters)

sensitivity and specificity of our method for ASST determined
by basophil histamine release test in 17 patients with antihistamines were 67% (ASST+ patients/HRT+ patients = 6/9)
and 38% (ASST-— patients/HRT- patients = 3/8), whereas

Allergy 65 (2010) 649-656 © 2009 John Wiley & Sons A/S
Takahagi et al

D-dimer

FDP (ng/ml)
D-dimer (ug/ml)

 

Figure 5 Relationship between disease activity of CU and levels of
plasma FDP, p-dimer within their normal ranges. A and B represent
levels of FDP, o-dimer before and after a subsidence and an exacerbation of CU respectively. FDP levels increased and decreased in

those in 19 patients without antihistamines were 82%
(ASST + patients/HRT+ patients = 9/11) and 50% (ASSTpatients/HRT- patients = 4/8) respectively. However, Asero
et al. also reported that PF,,.2 and p-dimer levels were not
associated with the histamine-releasing activity of patients’
sera (5). Taken together, the activation of the coagulation cascade and histamine-releasing autoantibodies might independently contribute to the pathogenesis of CU.

Finally, the measurement of FDP, p-dimer and CRP levels
may be useful for the assessment of disease activity of CU.
These biomarkers, in combination with symptom scores,
would enable evaluation of the effectiveness of medicines
and/or comparing results of various clinical or epidemiological studies. Further studies, especially concerning longer and
detailed time courses of these parameters in relation to wheal
formation, disease activities and mast cell activation, may
reveal their role in the pathogenesis of urticaria.

Acknowledgments
We thank our clinical staff for assistance in collecting the

peripheral blood, Dr Faiz Kermani for his review of the

References

1. Grattan CE, Humphreys F. Guidelines for 3. Asero R, Tedeschi A, Riboldi P, Cugno M.
Plasma of patients with chronic urticaria

evaluation and management of urticaria in

  

 

Activity of chronic urticaria, and FDP, p-dimer and CRP.

D-dimer

P= 0.149

= ¢

=

2 2

2 =

A £ 0S
a

 

0.0
& s
ss ¥
n=14

 

accordance with an exacerbation and a relief of symptoms even
within the normal range, whereas p-dimer levels shifted variously
regardless of symptoms. (Horizontal broken lines represent upper
limits of normal for parameters.).

manuscript, and Dr. Yoshihiko Sakurai (Nara Medical University of Medicine, Japan) for helpful discussions.

Supporting Information

Additional Supporting Information may be found in the
online version of this article:

Figure S1. Skin reactions to autologous sera and levels of
plasma FDP, p-dimer and serum CRP in patients with CU.
Patients with CU were classified into two groups by the
response to autologous serum skin test (ASST). No significant differences in these parameters were found between
ASST-positive group and -negative group. (ND, not done;
ns, not significant; Horizontal solid lines and broken lines
represent median values and upper limits of normal for parameters, respectively.).

Please note: Wiley-Blackwell are not responsible for the
content or functionality of any supporting materials supplied
by the authors. Any queries (other than missing material)
should be directed to the corresponding author for the
article.

the tissue factor pathway of blood
coagulation in patients with chronic urti
adults and children. Br J Dermatol 2007; shows signs of thrombin generation, and its caria. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007;119:
157:1116-1123. intradermal injection causes wheal-and-flare 705-710.
2. Zuberbier T, Bindslev-Jensen C, Canonica reactions much more frequently than autolo- 5. Asero R, Tedeschi A, Riboldi P, Griffini S,

W, Grattan CE, Greaves MW, Henz BM

et al. EAACI/GA2LEN/EDF guideline: 117:1113-1117.

definition, classification and diagnosis of 4. Asero R, Tedeschi A, Coppola R, Griffini S,
Paparella P, Riboldi P et al. Activation of

urticaria. Allergy 2006;61:316-320.

Allergy 65 (2010) 649-656 © 2009 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

gous serum, J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006;

Bonanni E, Cugno M. Severe chronic
urticaria is associated with elevated plasma
levels of D-dimer. Allergy 2008:63:
176-180.

 

655
Activity of chronic urticaria, and FDP, p-dimer and CRP

6.

10.

656

Cugno M, Marzano AV, Tedeschi A,
Fanoni D, Venegoni L, Asero R. Expression
of tissue factor by eosinophils in patients
with chronic urticaria. Int Arch Allergy
Immunol 2008;148:170-174.

. Fareed J, Hoppensteadt DA, Leya F, Iqbal

O, Wolf H, Bick R. Useful laboratory tests
for studying thrombogenesis in acute cardiac
syndromes. Clin Chem 1998;44(8 Pt 2):18451853.

. Levi M, van der Poll T. Two-way interac
tions between inflammation and coagulation.
Trends Cardiovasc Med 2005;15:254-259.

. Levi M, van der Poll T, ten Cate H, van

Deventer SJ. The cytokine-mediated imbalance between coagulant and anticoagulant
mechanisms in sepsis and endotoxaemia. Eur
J Clin Invest 1997;27:3-9.

Cunningham MA, Romas P, Hutchinson P,
Holdsworth SR, Tipping PG. Tissue factor
and factor VIIa receptor/ligand interactions
induce proinflammatory effects in macrophages. Blood 1999:94:3413-3420.

. Sabroe RA, Fiebiger E, Francis DM,

Maurer D, Seed PT, Grattan CE et al. Classification of anti-FcepsilonRI and anti-IgE
autoantibodies in chronic idiopathic urticaria and correlation with disease severity.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 2002;110:492-499.

12.

Sabroe RA, Grattan CE, Francis DM,

Barr RM, Kobza Black A, Greaves MW.
The autologous serum skin test:
screening test for autoantibodies in chronic

 

idiopathic urticaria. Br J Dermatol 1999;
140:446-452.

. Hide M, Greaves M. Chronic urticaria as an

autoimmune disease. New York: Springer
Wien, 2005.

._Kasperska-Zajac A, Brzoza Z, Rogala B.

Plasma concentration of interleukin 6 (IL-6),
and its relationship with circulating concentration of dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate
(DHEA-S) in patients with chronic idiopathic urticaria. Cytokine 2007;39:142-146.

. Fujii K, Konishi K, Kanno Y, Ohgou N.

Acute urticaria with elevated circulating
interleukin-6 is resistant to anti-histamine
treatment. J Dermatol 2001;28:248-250.

. Mlynek A, Zalewska-Janowska A, Martus

P, Staubach P, Zuberbier T, Maurer M.
disease activity in patients
with chronic urticaria? Allergy 2008:63:
777-180.

How to ass

  

. Tedeschi A, Lorini M, Suli C, Asero R.

Serum interleukin-18 in patients with
chronic ordinary urticaria: association with
disease activity. Clin Exp Dermatol
2007;32:568-570.

20.

21;

ry
Ps)

Takahagi et al.

. Asero R, Riboldi P, Tedeschi A, Cugno M,

  

Meroni P. Chronic urticaria: a ase at a
crossroad between autoimmunity and
coagulation. Autoimmun Rey 2007;7:

71-16.

. Parslew R, Pryce D, Ashworth J, Friedmann

PS. Warfarin treatment of chronic idiopathic
urticaria and angio-oedema. Clin Exp Allergy
2000;30: 1161-1165.

Chua SL, Gibbs S. Chronic urticaria
responding to subcutaneous heparin sodium.
Br J Dermatol 2005;153:216-217.

Fujii K, Usuki A, Kan-No Y, Ohgou N.
Elevation of circulating thrombinantithrombin III complex and fibrin degradation products in urticaria: a laboratory
finding unrelated to intravascular
coagulopathy. J Dermatol 2008:35:

308-310.

. Toubi E, Kessel A, Avshovich N,

Bamberger E, Sabo E, Nusem D et al.
Clinical and laboratory parameters in
predicting chronic urticaria duration: a
prospective study of 139 patients. Allergy
2004;59:869-873.

. Fusari A, Colangelo C, Bonifazi F,

Antonicelli L. The autologous serum skin
test in the follow-up of patients with chronic
urticaria. Allergy 2005:60:256-258.

Allergy 65 (2010) 649-656 © 2009 John Wiley & Sons A/S
