INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF IMMUNOPATHOLOGY AND PHARMACOLOGY

LETTER TO THE EDITOR

AUTOLOGOUS SERUM SKIN TEST REACTIVITY AND BASOPHIL HISTAMINE
RELEASE TEST IN PATIENTS WITH NASAL POLYPOSIS: PRELIMINARY RESULTS

Vol. 23, no. 2, 641-647 (2010)

G. ZAMBETTI, A. CIOFALO, P. SOLDO, M. FUSCONI, R. ROMEO’, A. GRECO,
G. ALTISSIMI, G.F. MACRI', C. MARINELLI', G. PAGLIUCA? and M. DE VINCENTIIS

Allergology Unit of the “G. Ferreri” Otolaryngology, Audiology and Phoniatrics Department,
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome; 'Allergology Unit, National Health Service, Rome; *Rhinology
Unit, Department of Otolaryngology, University of Rome - Polo Pontino, Latina, Italy

Received July 21, 2009 — Accepted April 9, 2010

An eosinophilic inflammatory process is generally observed in patients suffering from nasal polyposis
(NP), however its onset has not yet been defined. It has been suggested that immune activation of
inflammatory cells may be the cause. The aim of this study is to verify whether autoantibodies and/or
histamine-releasing factors are present in the serum of patients suffering from NP. In fact, we assume
that autoantibodies and/or histamine-releasing factors, as already demonstrated in chronic idiopathic
urticaria and asthma, may be involved in the pathogenesis of NP. In this case-control analytical study 40
patients with NP and 27 control subjects underwent the in vivo autologous serum skin test (ASST). The
sera from 6 patients suffering from NP and 9 control group subjects, who had all been previously studied
and randomly selected, underwent basophil histamine release assay from normal donor as a pilot study.
The ASST showed positive results in 55% of patients suffering from NP versus 8% of the control group
(p= .00006), the basophil histamine release test (BHRT) turned out positive in all patients tested and in
11% of the control group. We found a weak positive correlation between the percentage of histamine
release and the wheal diameter. ASST reactivity is very frequent in patients suffering from NP, thus
suggesting the presence of histamine-releasing factors in the blood stream. The BHRT was positive in
the serum of all patients, thus suggesting the presence of anti-FceRI, anti-IgE autoantibodies and/or
other histamine-releasing factors, the presence of which can play a role in triggering and maintaining
the eosinophilic inflammatory process in NP.

NP is a chronic inflammatory illness which
exhibits a high comorbidity with asthma (1) and in
which tissue T lymphocytes show a mixed phenotype
with a prevalence of Th2 (2). IL-5, eotaxin, MMP,
GATA-3, T-bet and IgE are up-regulated, whereas
TGF-B and FOXP3 are down-regulated. Eosinophils
accumulated in tissues are activated and show
reduced apoptosis. Cytokines and eosinophilic

inflammation increases in NP with IgE specific
against the Staphylococcus aureus superantigen
which induces T and B cell polyclonal activation
with IgE formation which may represent a risk
factor for NP, regardless of the allergy. The number
of mast cells is not higher, however they are most
likely IgE-positive and have a degranulated pattern.
NP/intrinsic asthma comorbidity may depend on

Key words: autologous serum skin test, basophil histamine-releasing test, moderate/severe persistent allergic rhinitis, '
nasal polyposis, non-allergic, non-infectious perennial rhinitis

Mailing address: Prof. Giampietro Zambetti, MD
Allergology Unit, “G, Ferreri”

Otolaryngology, Audiology and Phoniatrics Department,
Policlinico Umberto I,

Viale del Policlinico 155, 00161 Rome, Italy

Tel: ++39 06 49976837 Fax: ++39 06 49976804

e-mail: giampietro.zambetti@uniromal_.it

0394-6320 (2010)

Copyright © by BIOLIFE, s.a.s.

This publication and/or article is for individual use only and may not be further
reproduced without written permission from the copyright holder,
Unauthorized reproduction may result in financial and other penalties

’
642 G. ZAMBETTI ET AL.

some common aspects (3): increase of local IgE
and cytokines (from Thl and Th2); eosinophilic
infiltration and activation, cytokine and chemokine
expression similarity, and analogous reaction to the
superantigen. However, the cause of the eosinophilic
inflammation is still uncertain. In patients with
chronic urticaria (CU), and recently in patients with
intrinsic asthma (4), it has been demonstrated that
intradermal injections of autologous serum cause
a cutaneous reaction which seems to be due to the
presence of autoantibodies against the high-affinity
IgE receptor (FceRI) or against IgE or a histamine
release factor specific for mast cells (5). These
circulating factors may activate mast cells, starting
and maintaining bronchial inflammation in intrinsic
asthma patients and, we believe, eosinophilic
inflammation in NP patients. The aim of this study
is to determine whether similar factors are present in
the serum of NP patients.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

At the Allergology Unit of the ENT Department of the
University of Rome, 2 groups of subjects were selected
and subdivided as follows.

1. Accontrol group consisting of 27 people subdivided
into 3 sub-groups:

¢ Sub-group | was composed of 10 people (7 females
and 3 males; average age = 38+12 years) who
showed normal general and local conditions

e Sub-group 2 was composed of 7 patients (4 females
and 3 males; average age = 51+13 years) who
suffered from non-allergic, non-infectious perennial
rhinitis (Naniper)

¢ Sub-group 3 was composed of 10 patients (4 females
and 6 males; average age = 31+11 years).who suffered
from moderate/severe persistent allergic rhinitis (m/s
PAR) according to the ARIA classification (6).

Inclusion of Naniper and m/s PAR sub-groups was
necessary in order to evaluate the presence of these factors
in the two most frequent forms of rhinitis.

-2. A group of 40 bilateral eosinophilic NP patients (16
females and 24 males; average age = 52+14 years).

Both groups were submitted to a preliminary medical
examination in order to check family medical history, with
special focus on asthma, rhinitis, NP and immune diseases;
personal medical history by gathering information about
their present disease, related respiratory diseases (including
cystic fibrosis), immune diseases, number of previous NPrelated surgeries, and any pseudo-allergic reactions (PAR)
or allergies to drugs and food. All patients underwent

respiratory functionality tests before and after aspecific
bronchial provocation with methacholine (measurement
of bronchial hyperreactivity, BH). All asthmatic patients
showed a 20% decrease of FEV1 due to inhalation of <8
mmol of methacholine or bronchial obstruction to basal
spirometry with reversibility after inhalation of 200 pg of
albuterol. Moreover, the daily variation of PEF (>20%)
was monitored for as long as 2 weeks. Each patient
was prick-tested for respiratory and food allergens, the
uncertain cases also being tested for specific IgE (UniCAP
RAST, Pharmacia, Uppsala, Sweden). Three weeks
before the beginning of the study, all patients suspended
antihistaminic, corticoid and anti-leukotriene systemic or
local therapies. When the study started, patients did not
show any sign of acute respiratory infections. All patients
enrolled were submitted to a general otolaryngology
medical check-up and nasal endoscopy with rigid fiber
optic scope to exclude any anatomical alterations. All
patients with such alterations were excluded. The NP
group was CT-scanned for clinical purposes to assess
the size of NP and paranasal sinus involvement. M/s
PAR patients were diagnosed through positive medical
history for allergenic exposure symptoms, prick-test
positivity for perennial allergens and, in some cases,
RAST. Naniper patients were diagnosed based on their
positive medical history for symptoms due to exposure
to non-specific stimuli (cold, humidity, etc.), presence
of symptoms including nasal congestion, rhinorrhoea,
sneezing, with two or more symptoms occurring for more
than 1 hour and many days, skin prick-test and RASTnegativity, and nasal cytology to exclude any increase in
eosinophils, basophils, and neutrophils. Normal controls
were checked through medical history and skin prick-test;
while NP patients underwent endoscopic examination,
with polyps not hindering nasal breathing and showing
a significant size (extrameatal, II degree of NP, according
to Lund’s classification) (7), CT scan of the paranasal
sinuses and, finally, nasal cytology to confirm the increase
of the eosinophils (1-4+ degrees). The results of all these
examinations, together with sex and age, were used to
compare the two groups. A second medical check-up
was performed 7 days later. A 10-ml blood sample was
taken from all patients using sterile vacuum tubes without
clotting the accelerator (Venoject, Terumo, Leuven,
Belgium). Blood was allowed to clot at room temperature
for 2 hours. The serum was obtained by centrifugation at
500*g for 15 minutes under sterile conditions soon before
its use in the ASST. Additional 1-2 ml samples of sterile
serum were used to perform BHRT.

The hospital ethics committee approved our research
protocol. Patients and control subjects were aware of the
purpose of this study and gave their written informed
consent.
Int. J. Immunopathol. Pharmacol. 643

ASST

In both groups intradermal injections of 0.05 ml of
fresh autologous serum or saline solution (0.9% w/v
NaCl) were used as a negative control using disposable
sterile syringes with 27 needles (Myjector, Terumo,
Leuven, Belgium) and were bilaterally performed in the
volar area of the forearm, 4 cm from each other. The
observer was unaware of the nature of patient status.
The skin areas selected showed no signs of urticaria or
dermatitis during the 2 previous days. Such tests were
repeated after one week to assess their repeatability.
Reactions were analysed and interpreted after 30 minutes
and always by the same operator. Lack of reaction to
the saline control was considered as a prerequisite for
continuing this study. ASST reactions were deemed
positive when the response after serum injection provoked
a wheal formation surrounded by erythema of the same
size in both forearms. The wheal measured at least a 3 mm
in diameter and was classified as 1+, 2+ or 3+, depending
on whether the wheal diameter was in the ranges of 3-4,
4-5 or >5 mm, respectively.

BHRT

In 15 cases (9 control subjects: 3 normal controls, 3
Naniper, and 3 m/s PAR; 6 NP patients without respiratory
allergies randomly selected in each group) which had
previously been studied through ASST, we began a
pilot study on the serum reactivity to BHRT. Simple
randomization was obtained by assigning a computergenerated number to each case through casual extraction
of 3 numbers for each control sub-group and 6 numbers
for the NP group (Randomization Com Program). One
adult donor whose basophils responded to anti-I[gE with
a release >30% was used in the assay. The basophil
leukocytes were prepared by dextran sedimentation (5 mL
of freshly drawn heparinized blood was added to 1 mL of
5.0% dextran and 0.25 mL of 0.2 mol/L EDTA, pH 7.0) and
allowed to sediment at 5°C for 45 minutes. The basophilcontaining layer was washed once with piperazine1,4-bis (2-ethanesulfonic acid) containing 0.036% of
human serum albumin (PIPES-HSA) and the cells were
resuspended in 2 mL of PIPES-HAS containing 500 pg/
mL of recombinant IL-3 (R&D Systems, Minneapolis,
Minn). Samples of 40 pL cell suspension were incubated
in filter plates (Whatman, Brentford, United Kingdom) at
37°C for 60 minutes with serum diluted 1:4 and 1:8 in
duplicate (final reaction volume, 80 tL). After incubation,
all samples were added to 200 pL of PIPES-HSA and
centrifuged at 2000 * g at S°C for 5 minutes to remove
serum proteins and released histamine. The cell sediment
trapped on the filter was lysed by using 20 pL of a 7%
HC10,. Then 200 uL of PIPES buffer were added and the
samples were centrifuged to recover the histamine from

the lysed basophils. The histamine content in the filtrate
was measured by using the glass fiber method according
to the manufacturer (RefLab, Copenhagen, Denmark).
Serum-induced histamine release was expressed as a
percentage of total histamine content. Spontaneous release
in all experiments was less than 10% and was subtracted
to determine serum specific release. Serum from healthy
individuals induced histamine release as much as 16%,
and the BHRT was therefore considered positive only at a
release >16.5% .

Statistical analysis

Statistical analysis was performed by using the Number
Cruncher Statistical System software 6.0.1 version
(NCSS Statistical Software, Kaysville, Utah). A stepwise
regression model was applied for the identification of
the independent predictors of outcome. Fisher’s exact
test was used in order to compare occurrence of ASST
and BHRT positivity in patients with NP and control
subjects. Numbers are reported as mean + SD. Spearman
rank correlation was used to examine linear association
between percentage of histamine release of the BHRT and
wheal diameter of the ASST. A p-value lower than 0.05
was considered significant.

RESULTS

Among various demographic characteristics
(Table 1), family medical history revealed varying
percentages of respiratory diseases in the NP
patients and in the control group (m/s PAR and
Naniper). NP patient personal history showed the
highest incidence of intrinsic asthma as well as
the presence of non-allergic rhinitis, autoimmune
thyroiditis, CU and other skin diseases. None of the
patients had cystic fibrosis. Approximately 27% of
the NP patients had polyp reformation following
surgery. NP patients also showed an ASA/NSAIDshypersensitivity response and a presumable allergic
origin in approximately 27% of the cases. Among
the demographic and clinical characteristics of
the two groups it is interesting to note that two
variables were identified, by univariate analysis,
as weak NP predictors, that is, intrinsic asthma
(p< .04) and ASA/NSAIDs-hypersensitivity (p<
.05). 8% of the control group (1 normal control and
1 m/s PAR patient) and 55% of the the NP group
were positive for ASST (Fig. 1), with a prevalence
of a 3+ response for this group. In 6 NP cases with
ASA/NSAIDs-hypersensitivity, ASST positivity
644

G. ZAMBETTI ET AL.

Table I. Demographic characteristics of control and NP groups.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

control group NP group
Normal Naniper m/s PAR
Number of subjects 10 d 10 40
Family history:
Asthma a 28.5 % 20% 15%
Rhinitis {oa 14.28% 80% 22.5%
Polyposis a a a | 12.5%
Chronic urticaria a a 10% a
Angio-oedema [a a a 2.5%
Personal hystory:
Asthma:
- allergic a a 40% 17.5%
- non-allergic a 14.4% a 30%*
Rhinitis a 100 % ** 100 % * 27.5% *
Polyposis a a a 100 %
Autoimmune thyroiditis a a a 2.5%
Hypothyroidism a a a 2.5%
Chronic urticaria a a a 7.5%
Eczema a a a 5%
Pityriasis a a a 2.5 %
Dermatitis a | a | a 2.5%
Psoriasis ] a {| a a 2.5%
Anaphylaxis a a a 2.5%
Releapse after surgery a a a 27.5% ___|
Allergies/PAR to:
ASA/NSAIDs a a a 15%
Other drugs La 143% 10% 2.5%
Foods a a 10% 71.5 %
Prick test:
D. Pt. a a 100 % 15%
P.O. ia a a 10% 17.5%
Alternaria | a a a 2.5%
Grass a a a 15%

 

 

 

 

 

Naniper = non-allergic, non-infectious perennial rhinitis; m/s PAR = moderate/severe persistent allergic rhinitis; NP =
nasal polyposis; ASA/NSAIDs = acetylsalicylic acid/non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; D.Pt= dermatophagoides
pteronyssinus; P.O.= parietaria officinalis; *= allergic rhinitis; **= non-allergic rhinitis; PAR= pseudo-allergic

reaction;*=p<0.04; “p<0.05; a=absent.

(i+ in 2 cases, 2+ in 1 case and 3+ in 1 case)
reached 66.7%. Comparison between the NP group
and the control sub-groups (Table II) demonstrated
significative p-values for ASST in all cases, with
the exclusion of NP vs Naniper for BHRT. The tests
were repeated after 1 week, allowing the patients
to be classified in a rather analogous manner, thus
confirming their intrinsic reproducibility. In the
15 randomly selected cases, BHRT (Fig. 2) was
positive in all 6 cases of NP (mean histamine release

= 21.3+2.87%), in 1 control group case (1 Naniper)
and negative in the other cases. Furthermore, we
observed a weak correlation between the wheal
diameter (ASST) and the percentage of histamine
released from basophils (BHRT). Finally, a low
discrepancy was detected among the results: BHRT
was positive when ASST was-negative in the NP
group and in 1 case of the Naniper sub-group, and
was negative in the 2 ASST-positive cases of the 2
controls.
Int. J. Immunopathol. Pharmacol.

645

Table II. Comparison of the ASST and BHRT between NP group and control sub-groups (Fishers exact test).

 

ASST:

NP vs Naniper p = .007
NP vs m/s PAR p= .01
NP vs Normal p = .01
NP with ASA/NSAIDs-hypersensitivity vs Normal p = .035
NP with ASA/NSAIDs-hypersensitivity vs Naniper p = .021
NP with ASA/NSAIDs-hypersensitivity vs m/s PAR p = .035
NP vs control p = .00006

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

BHRT:
NP vs Normal p = .01

NP vs Naniper p = n.s.
NP vs m/s PAR p = .01
NP vs control p = .001

 

 

 

 

——|

—

Naniper = non-allergic, non-infectious perennial rhinitis; m/s PAR = moderate/severe persistent allergic rhinitis; NP =
nasal polyposis; ASA/NSAIDs = acetylsalicylic acid/non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; ASST = autologous serum
skin test; BHRT = basophil histamine release test;

n.s. = not significant.

 

 

 

 

 

ASST:
OO o1+ m2+ 93+

 

 

 

2
8
o
+
2
EJ

  
    
 

1.714021
1.68 +0.29
6.61+1.08

  

 

1.744037
352045
451 +036

 

Number of subjects
fo)

”
+

rl
m/s PAR

32

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Normal Naniper

Control group NP group

Fig. 1. Values of the ASST in control and NP groups. ASST values (mean + S.D.) are given in mm at the top of the bars.

DISCUSSION . was correlated with BH (12), in allergic rhinitis

(29%) and in patients with non-allergic respiratory

ASST positivity was first described in CU (8) and
successively in multiple drug allergies (94% of acute
urticaria patients) (9), in NSAIDs-hypersensitivity
(10) (30% with CU), in intrinsic asthma (11),
(45% of the cases, 5% with CU) of which 28%

symptoms (47% of the cases, 58% with CU) (13).
There was a 55% incidence in our NP group.
There was a weak ASST/BHRT correlation and the
discrepancy observed in some cases may depend
on variables which may be attributed to the two
646 G. ZAMBETTI ET AL.

% Histamine release

 

5 6 7 8 E}

Wheal diameter (mm)

Fig. 2. Linear correlation between percentage of histamine release and wheal diameter.

(e = Control group; © = NP group).
Sperman rank correlation, r=0.69; p<0.01

tests: skin test on previously damaged skin which is
incapable of reacting; low title of autoantibodies or
their specificity for mast cells rather than circulating
basophils (4); use of a functional assay, when
there is an absence of a standardized immunoassay
procedure, also suggesting the need for an optimal
cell source. Western blot analysis was not used
since autoantibodies are detectable in the serum
of heterogeneous individuals. However, the low
BHRT response does not allow us to perform a
valid statistical analysis. BHRT and ASST identify
two phenomena: the first shows the presence of
autoantibodies against IgE or FceRI in vitro, the
second shows that the serum is capable of releasing
histamine from mast cells, but whether this is due
to autoantibodies in all cases or not is not known
(14). ASST positivity in NP does not seem to be a
non-specific phenomenon since there is a significant
difference between this group and the control group,
which is also confirmed in NP with ASA/NSAIDshypersensitivity. Lastly, ASST may be used as a
predictive test. Our results show that 7.5% of NP
patients had CU, 47.5% had asthma and it has been
recently shown that 77% of CU patients show BH
(15). We believe that an autoimmune mechanism
acts as a link between these diseases and that skin and
upper and lower airway symptoms probably occur

within a single framework of mast cell activation in
different tissues. Our investigation has been the first
to use ASST and BHRT in the study of NP; however,
further research is required in order to verify the role
of these autoantibodies in concomitant autoimmune
diseases, such as immunologic screening, in order to
also evaluate the risk of relapse following surgery,
and to better define their role in the eosinophilic
inflammatory process.

REFERENCES

1. Dursun AB, Sin BA, Dursun E, Misirligil Z. Clinical
aspects of the link between chronic sinonasal disease
and asthma. Allergy Asthma Proc 2006; 27:510-5.

-2.  Sanchez-Segura A, Brieva JA, Rodriguez C. T

lymphocytes that infiltrate nasal polyps have a
specialized phenotype and produce a mixed Th1/Th2
pattern of cytokines. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1998;
102:953-60.

3. Bousquet J, Khaltaev N, Cruz AA, et al. Allergic
rhinitis and its impact on asthma (ARIA) 2008
update. Allergy 2008; 63(S):8-160.

4. Tedeschi A, Comi AL, Lorini M, Tosini C, Miadonna
A. Autologous serum skin test reactivity in patients
with non-allergic asthma. Clin Exp Allergy 2005; 35:
Int. J. Immunopathol. Pharmacol.

849-53.

Sabroe RA, Fiebiger E, Francis DM, et al.
Classification of  anti-FceRI and  anti-IgE
autoantibodies in chronic idiopathic urticaria and
correlation with disease severity. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2002; 110:492-9.

Cruz AA, Popov T, Pawankar R, Annessi-Maesano
I, Fokken W, Kemp J, Ohta K, Price D, Bousquet J.
Common characteristic of upper and lower airways
in rhinitis and asthma. Allergy 2007; 62(S):1-41.
Lund VJ, Kennedy DW. Quantification for staging
sinusitis. The Staging and Therapy Group. Ann Otol
Rhinol Laryngol 1995; 167(S):17-21.

Grattan CE, Wallington TB, Warin RP, Kennedy
CT, Bradfield JW. A serological marker in chronic
idiopathic urticaria. A clinical, immunological and
histological evaluation. Br J Dermatol 1986; 114:
583-90.

Asero R, Tedeschi A, Lorini M, Caldironi G, Barocci
F. Sera from patients with multiple drug allergy
syndrome contain circulating histamine-releasing
factors. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 2003; 31:195
10.

647

200.

Asero R, Tedeschi A, Lorini M. Autoreactivity is
highly prevalent in patients with multiple intolerances
to NSAIDs. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2002; 88:
468-72.

. Comi AL, Tedeschi A, Lorini M, Miadonna A.

Novel clinical and serological aspects in non-allergic
asthma. Respir Med 2007; 101:2526-33.

. Jang AS, Park Js, Lee JH, Park SW, Kim DJ, Park

CS. Autologous serum skin test for autoantibodies
is associated with airway hyperresponsiveness in
patients with asthma. Respiration 2007; 74:293-6.

. Mari A. Allergy-like asthma and rhinitis: A cross
sectional survey of a respiratory cohort and
diagnostic approach using the autologous serum skin
test. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 2004; 133:29-39.

. Kikuchi Y, Kaplan AP. Mechanism of autoimmune

activation of basophils in chronic urticaria. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 2001; 107:1056-62.

Asero R, Madonini E. Bronchial hyperresponsiveness
is acommon feature in patients with chronic urticaria.
J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol 2006; 16:19-23.
