(®) Check for updates

Supplement

AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
( OTOLARYNGOLOGY
HEAD AND NECK SURGERY
FOUNDATION

 

Targeted Molecular Therapies in Allergy pa

and Rhinology

Cecelia C. Damask, DO', Matthew W. Ryan, MD?,

Thomas B. Casale, MD?, Mario Castro, MD‘,

Christine B. Franzese, MD®, Stella E. Lee, MD®,

Otolaryngology—
Head and Neck Surgery

© American Academy of
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck
Surgery Foundation 2020

Reprints and permission:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0194599820965233
http://otojournal.org

@SAGE

Joshua M. Levy, MD’, Sandra Y. Lin, MD®, Peter A. Lio, MD’,

Anju T. Peters, MD’, Michael P. Platt, MD'°,
and Andrew A. White, MD''

Abstract

Biologic agents, monoclonal antibodies that target highlyspecific molecular pathways of inflammation, are becoming
integrated into care pathways for multiple disorders that are
relevant in otolaryngology and allergy. These conditions
share common inflammatory mechanisms of so-called Type 2
inflammation with dysregulation of immunoglobulin E production and eosinophil and mast cell degranulation leading to
tissue damage. Biologic agents are now available for the treatment of chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps (CRSWNP),
asthma, eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA),
atopic dermatitis (AD), and chronic spontaneous urticaria
(CSU). This paper summarizes the diagnosis and management
of these conditions and critically reviews the clinical trial data
that has led to regulatory approval of biologic agents for these
conditions.

Keywords

biologics, biologic agent, anti-IgE, anti-IL-5, anti-IL-4, anti-IL13, anti-TSLP, omalizumab, mepolizumab, reslizumab, benralizumab, dupilumab, tezepelumab, T2 inflammation, asthma,
allergic asthma, eosinophilic asthma, chronic rhinosinusitis
with nasal polyposis, atopic dermatitis, chronic spontaneous
urticaria, eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis, aspirinexacerbated respiratory disease, eosinophilia, unified airway

Received July 3, 2020; accepted September 1|5, 2020.

ew biologic agents are now available for a variety of

inflammatory diseases that are relevant to the otolar
yngologist and allergist. The biologics discussed in
this review are monoclonal antibodies that target highly specific and critical pathways that are essential in the pathogenesis of allergic and respiratory disorders. These agents are
changing the treatment paradigms for chronic rhinosinusitis
with nasal polyps (CRSwNP), aspirin-exacerbated respiratory
disease (AERD), asthma, eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA), atopic dermatitis (AD), and chronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU).

There is a rapidly expanding scientific literature on the
role of biologics in these disorders, and recognizing a need
to educate otolaryngologists and allergists on the current state
of knowledge concerning these treatments, the American
Academy of Otolaryngic Allergy convened a multidisciplinary panel of experts for a Biologics Roundtable discussion in
May 2019. Panelists were assigned specific content areas for
presentation to the group, summarized pivotal trials that led to
the current indications for use of these treatments, and critically reviewed current treatment paradigms. The panel also
offered insight on a variety of practical issues concerning the
use of biologics and where more research is needed to support
informed decision making. In addition to analyzing evidence
that underpins the approved indications for these agents, the
panel considered the relative clinical benefit of biologics as
compared with standard or traditional treatment approaches.
This article summarizes the discussion that occurred at the
May 2019 Biologics Roundtable regarding diseases relevant
to allergy and rhinology for which biologic agents are a treatment option. Panelists did not receive any compensation for
their participation.

Type 2 Inflammation

While CRSwNP, AERD, asthma, EGPA, AD, and CSU are
heterogeneous in nature and have multiple phenotypes, most
are characterized by type 2 inflammation (Figure 1). In type

 

‘University of Central Florida, Lake Mary, Florida, USA

2UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA
3University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA

‘University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas, USA
5University of Missouri Medical Center, Columbia, Missouri, USA
‘University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA

7Emory Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA

8Johns Hopkins Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA
°Northwestern Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA

‘Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA

"'Scripps Clinic, La Jolla, California, USA

Corresponding Author:
Cecelia C. Damask, DO, University of Central Florida, 795 Primera Blvd, Ste
1031, Lake Mary, FL 32746.
Email: cbaukus@yahoo.com
Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

 

Allergens

  

Dendritic
cell

 

Mast
cell
Naive
T cell
be IL-4
alle The cell
IL-13
Bell ks

   

Eosinophil

Microbes
Viruses

Glycolipids
Pollution

   

IL-33 Macrophage
TSLP
@ ILc2
Ss.

Figure |. T2 inflammation. Type 2 immune responses involve accumulation of eosinophils, mast cells, Th2 cells, ILC2s, and IgE-producing B
cells, and type 2 mediators and cytokines (IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13). IgE, immunoglobulin E; IL-4, interleukin 4; IL-5, interleukin 5; IL-13, interleukin 13; IL-25, interleukin 25; IL-33, interleukin 33; ILC2, type 2 innate lymphoid cell; Th2 cell, T helper type 2 cell; TSLP, thymic stromal

lymphopoietin.

2 inflammation, antigens interact with dendritic cells, leading to T-cell activation and differentiation. In allergic disease, type 2 differentiated T-helper (Th2) cells drive the
formation of allergen-specific immunoglobulin E (IgE) via
IL-4 and IL-13. This IgE binds to mast cells and basophils
and functions as the receptor that triggers allergen-induced
degranulation. Released mediators as well as IL-4 and IL-13
lead to tissue eosinophilia.’ In nonallergic type 2 inflammation, type 2 differentiated innate lymphoid (ILC2) cells drive
the same cell types and mediators to produce eosinophilic
inflammation. This eosinophilic inflammation is sustained
by IL-5. The recruitment, activation, and secretion of these
inflammatory cells lead to tissue damage and a cycle of
chronic inflammation.“

Targeting the Molecules of Type 2
Inflammation

Immunoglobulin E

IgE is the basis for atopy and plays a central role in allergic
inflammatory disorders. IgE is secreted by B cells and
plasma cells, found in serum, and bound to high- and lowaffinity IgE cell surface receptors! (Figure 2). IgE-receptor
interactions are involved in multiple aspects of the allergic
response, making IgE a long-standing target for therapeutic
intervention.?~+

The immediate allergic response is triggered by allergeninduced cross-linking of receptor-bound IgE on mast cells
and basophils, resulting in the release of a variety of inflammatory mediators, such as histamine. Omalizumab is a

humanized monoclonal anti-IgE antibody that forms complexes with circulating free IgE, inhibiting binding of the IgE
molecules to high-affinity and CD23 receptors. Omalizumab
cannot complex with or displace bound IgE, nor can it bind to
IgE receptors. This is important because omalizumab does not
activate mast cells or basophils.

By binding to free IgE and forming small complexes,
omalizumab prevents the IgE from binding to receptors on
mast cells. This prevents mast cell-bound IgE-antigen interaction and IgE cross-linking, effectively preventing mast cell
degranulation and subsequent release of mediators. In turn,
this prevents the allergic symptoms normally caused by
these events. When IgE levels remain at low levels with
omalizumab treatment, high-affinity cell surface receptors
are also downregulated, further inhibiting the development
of allergic symptoms by reducing the potential for basophil
and mast cell activation by uncomplexed free IgE molecules.** Similar downregulation of receptors occurs in mast
cells and basophils, but downregulation is faster in basophils.*° Omalizumab also blocks binding of IgE to lowaffinity IgE receptors, although the therapeutic relevance of
this action is less clear.'°

IL-5

Interleukin 5 (IL-5) is a potent proeosinophilic cytokine that
controls cellular differentiation and maturation of eosinophils in the bone marrow, as well as the survival and activation of eosinophils at peripheral sites. Eosinophils are central
to the pathogenesis and severity of chronic inflammatory
disorders of the airway, including asthma and nasal
Damask et al

 

Allergens

    
 

Dendritic
cell

&D Eosinophil

Smooth muscle

Figure 2. IgE-mediated allergic/inflammatory pathway. Allergens are taken up by dendritic cells and presented to naive T-helper cells. A cascade of events leads to production of the type 2 cytokines IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13; secretions of IgE by B cells; and chemoattraction of mast
cells and eosinophils. IgE, immunoglobulin E; IL-4, interleukin 4; IL-5, interleukin 5; IL-13, interleukin 13; IL-25, interleukin 25; IL-33, interleukin 33; Th2 cell, T helper type 2 cell; TSLP, thymic stromal lymphopoietin.

be Viruses ie

 

Glycolipids i Migrobgs Pollution == Tobacco Smoke
IL-25 IL-25
IL-33 Macophage IL-33
TSLP TSLP
NKT cell
ILC2

Smooth
muscle

&D Eosinophil

Figure 3. ILC2-mediated type 2 responses. The interaction of environmental exposures with the airway epithelium leads to the release of
the mediators IL-33, IL-25, and TSLP. Type 2 cytokines can be produced by ILC2s. ILC2 can be activated by proteases, pathogens, pollution,
and other stimuli. IL-5, interleukin 5; IL-13, interleukin 13; IL-25, interleukin 25; IL-33, interleukin 33; ILC2, type 2 innate lymphoid cell; NKT

cell, natural killer cell; TSLP, thymic stromal lymphopoietin.

polyposis, and patients with asthma and eosinophilia have
more frequent exacerbations.

IL-5 is produced by Th2 lymphocytes and ILC2 cells
(Figure 3). Th2 cells synthesize and release IL-5 when they
are activated by antigen-presenting dendritic cells in the
presence of IL-4. This process occurs via stimulation of
STAT6 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 6)

and GATA3 (GATA binding protein 3). ILC2 cells also produce IL-5 upon activation by epithelium-derived alarmins,
such as IL-25, IL-33, and thymic stromal lymphopoietin,
which can also activate GATA3.'”!> Elevated levels of IL-5
mRNA are observed in bronchial biopsies of patients with
asthma, and elevated IL-5 levels correlate with asthma

severity. MayD
Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

 

Allergens

   
   

Dendritic

TSLP
cell

Mast
cell

Naive
T cell
Omalizumab

Y Y ioe IL-4 |}—Dupilumab
X

 

©) Pai Th2 cell
IL-13

Beall Tap x
jupilumal

Reslizumab

Mepolizumab

Benralizumab

Eosinophil

Microbes
Viruses

Glycolipids
Pollution

IL-33 Macrophage
TSLP

ILC2

   
 

Reslizumab
Mepolizumab
Benralizumab

Figure 4. Molecular targets for biologic therapies. The schematic includes sites of targeted treatments with approved monoclonal antibodies. The interaction of genetic susceptibility and environmental exposures, such as allergens, viruses, pollutants, and irritants, creates airway
inflammation. This process lends itself to numerous therapeutic targets that have been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration.
IgE, immunoglobulin E; IL-4, interleukin 4; IL-5, interleukin 5; IL-13, interleukin 13; IL-25, interleukin 25; IL-33, interleukin 33; ILC2, type 2

innate lymphoid cell; TSLP, thymic stromal lymphopoietin.

Since IL-5 is critical for eosinophil growth, differentiation, and migration to the airways, it is an appropriate therapeutic target in eosinophilic asthma.

There are 2 ways that monoclonal antibodies can block
the effects of IL-5. One approach is to bind to IL-5 itself.
Mepolizumab and reslizumab are 2 humanized monoclonal
antibodies that bind directly to IL-5, preventing it from binding to the IL-5 receptor. Mepolizumab and reslizumab bind to
IL-5, blocking its binding to the alpha chain of the IL-5 receptor complex on the eosinophil cell surface.'® By inhibiting IL5 signaling through blockade, mepolizumab and reslizumab
reduce the production and survival of eosinophils.

Another approach to IL-5 blockade is to bind to a component of the IL-5 receptor. Benralizumab targets the IL-5
receptor a on eosinophils and basophils, which prevents IL5 binding.'® As with the other monoclonal antibodies that
target IL-5, benralizumab depletes blood and airway eosinophils. However, unlike mepolizumab and reslizumab, benralizumab induces antibody-dependent, cell-mediated cytotoxicity.
An active immune response against benralizumab-tagged eosinophils and basophils, via natural killer cells, leads to apoptosis
and further depletion of eosinophil numbers. !°!7

IL-4/13

IL-4 and IL-13 fuel eosinophilic and allergic inflammatory
processes in type 2 inflammatory diseases via a variety of
mechanisms, including IgE synthesis, induction of airway
hyperresponsiveness, proliferation of bronchial fibroblasts,
enhanced mucus production, and recruitment of basophils

and eosinophils. IL-4 and IL-13 function upstream of IL-5
and affect more cell types beyond eosinophils, including
airway smooth muscle cells, fibroblasts, macrophages, mast
cells, and basophils. Beyond their ability to promote a multimodal inflammatory response, IL-4 and IL-13 also appear to
downregulate important components of barrier function in
AD, such as filaggrin, ceramides, and antimicrobial peptides,
in the skin and airways.!*??

Blockade of IL-4 and IL-13 can be achieved via receptor
inhibition or neutralizing antibodies. Dupilumab binds to the
IL-4Ra subunit, inhibiting IL-13 and IL-4 signaling and
decreasing IgE production by about 40%. The IL-4 w
receptor is a common receptor domain for IL-4 and IL-13.

Figure 4 presents sites of the targeted treatments with
approved monoclonal antibodies.

Chronic Rhinosinusitis With Nasal Polyps
Definition and Diagnosis

CRSwNP is an inflammatory condition of the nose and paranasal sinuses that lasts >12 weeks.?* Symptoms include
nasal obstruction/congestion, anterior or posterior nasal discharge, and loss of the sense of smell. The diagnosis of
CRSwNP is confirmed by the finding of nasal polyps (usually bilateral) on anterior rhinoscopy or nasal endoscopy.
Phenotyping of chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) into CRSwNP
and CRS without nasal polyps does not adequately reflect
the pathophysiologic diversity*> of these conditions; nevertheless, most CRSwNP is characterized by type 2
Damask et al

 

eosinophilic inflammation, and CRSwNP is closely linked to
atopy/allergy and asthma.”°

Management

In general, corticosteroids are the most effective treatments
for nasal polyp inflammation. Patients with mild symptoms
or minimal polyp burden can be adequately treated with
long-term topical corticosteroids.?”°* When control of this
inflammation is insufficient, short courses of oral corticosteroids (OCSs) are often added. The optimal duration of OCS
treatment is not established, but randomized controlled trials
of a 2-week flat course or 3-week tapering course of oral
steroid, beginning at a prednisone equivalent dose of 40 to
50 mg, achieved significant reduction of polyp size with a
concomitant improvement in CRS symptoms.’? The longterm efficacy of such as a course of oral steroids, in conjunction with daily topical intranasal steroids, is likely 8 to 12
weeks.*° Short courses of antibiotics (<3 weeks), especially
if concomitant bacterial infection is present, and longer-term
courses of macrolide antibiotics (>3 months) may provide
subjective benefit in select patients.*! Aspirin desensitization
is an option in patients with AERD.”’

Sinus surgery is useful when appropriate medical therapy
fails to alleviate symptoms or eliminate polyps and sinus
inflammation or when recurrent polyps necessitate the use of
oral steroids >2 times a year. Complete sinus surgery creates
access to improve the effectiveness of topical intranasal steroids. ‘“‘High dose” topical steroids administered via saline
irrigation, head-down positioning, or specialized applicator
devices have been shown to be beneficial in these patients.*”

Some nasal polyp disease is so severe that complications
arise from excessive steroid use.*’ For these patients, the
emerging biologic therapies hold great promise as an add-on
treatment approach that will control disease without repeated
surgery or repeated requirements for systemic steroids.

CRSwNP Treatment With Biologics

Dupilumab. At present, the only biologic approved by the US
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for treatment of nasal
polyp disease is dupilumab. Dupilumab is approved for addon maintenance treatment for adults with inadequately controlled CRSwNP. A phase II study was conducted to determine if dupilumab would improve clinical measures of
disease when added to intranasal corticosteroids (INCSs) in
patients with CRSwNP. The primary endpoint was change
in endoscopic nasal polyp score (NPS) after 16 weeks.
Secondary endpoints included sinus computed tomography
(CT) scores, olfaction, validated symptom scores, biomarkers, and safety assessments. The trial enrolled 60 adults
with CRSwNP, of whom 35 had asthma. All had failed >8
weeks of INCS, had >2 symptoms of CRSwNP, and had
bilateral nasal polyps on endoscopy. Participants were
treated with a subcutaneous (SC) 600-mg loading dose of
dupilumab, followed by SC 300 mg weekly plus mometasone furoate (MF) nasal spray for 16 weeks. All clinical
outcomes—including NPS, Lund-McKay CT score, Sino
Nasal Outcome Score (SNOT-22), and measures of
olfaction—improved significantly in the group treated with
dupilumab as compared with control. NPS was reduced by
1.6 relative to placebo in the actively treated group (mean
baseline NPS of 5.9 in the active treatment group). LundMackay CT score*? significantly improved by 8.9 points
relative to placebo (baseline in active group, 18.6). Sinonasal quality of life significantly improved in participants
treated with dupilumab (26-point reduction relative to
placebo; baseline score of 41 in active treatment arm).
Olfaction, as assessed by the University of Pennsylvania
Smell Identification Test (UPSIT), significantly improved
with dupilumab treatment. The baseline UPSIT score was
13 of 40 in the active treatment group, and the mean UPSIT
score increased by 13 relative to placebo. In patients with
asthma, dupilumab improved FEV1 percentage predicted
(forced expiratory volume in | second; 7.1% increase relative to placebo) and asthma control (1.1-unit reduction on
Asthma Control Questionnaire—5 score). The Asthma Control Questionnaire minimal clinically important difference
has been well established and accepted as 0.5 points for
within-person change.*+*> Biomarkers associated with Th2
cells, such as serum IgE and plasma eotaxin 3, decreased
with treatment, but peripheral eosinophil count did not significantly decrease.*°

SINUS-24 was a phase III trial of dupilumab versus placebo in 276 participants with severe CRSwNP with and
without comorbid asthma who had been treated with systemic corticosteroids and/or surgery and were being treated
with daily intranasal MF. Patients were randomized to SC
dupilumab (300 mg) or placebo every 2 weeks for 24 weeks.

Dupilumab significantly improved the NPS (baseline
score of 5.6 on a 0-8 scale, with a mean improvement of 2),
nasal congestion, Lund-Mackay CT score (baseline score of
19, with a mean improvement of 7.4), olfaction (UPSIT,
with a mean improvement of 10.6), and SNOT-22 (baseline
score of 48, with a mean improvement of 21.1 points). The
proportion requiring systemic corticosteroids or nasal polyposis surgery (surgery for nasal polyp disease) during the
24-week treatment period was 7.2% in the dupilumab group
versus 23.3% in the placebo group (16% absolute risk
reduction).>”

Epistaxis occurred more frequently in the dupilumab
group versus the control group (7.7% vs 3.0% placebo).
Treatment discontinuation due to adverse events occurred in
2% in the dupilumab group. Dupilumab-treated participants
had a greater initial increase from baseline in blood eosinophil count as compared with those treated with placebo,
which is likely related to its underlying mechanism of action
in blocking IL-4—mediated eosinophil migration out of the
bloodstream. The clinical significance of the transient
increase in eosinophils is unknown.

SINUS-52 was a 3-arm phase III trial that randomized
448 participants into 3 treatment groups: SC dupilumab (300
mg) every 2 weeks for 52 weeks; SC dupilumab (300 mg)
every 2 weeks for 24 weeks, then every 4 weeks for an
additional 28 weeks; and placebo. SINUS-52 enrolled
Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

 

participants with baseline disease characteristics similar to
those enrolled in SINUS-24. Seventy-two percent of those in
SINUS-24 had prior sinus surgery, and 58% of those in
SINUS-52 had prior surgery with a mean number of 2.0
prior procedures in both groups. Both groups had an average
of 1.6 systemic corticosteroid courses in the 2 years prior to
enrollment. The average NPS was 5.8 in SINUS-24 and 6.1
in SINUS-52. Fifty-eight percent of the SINUS-24 group
and 60% in the SINUS-52 group had comorbid asthma, with
30% in SINUS-24 and 27% in SINUS-52 having AERD.
Both groups had baseline eosinophils >300 cells/wL and a
total IgE >200 IU/mL.

Dupilumab significantly improved the NPS (baseline
score of 6.1 on a 0-8 scale, with a mean improvement of
1.80), nasal congestion, Lund-Mackay CT score (baseline
score of 18, with a mean improvement of 6.94), olfaction
(UPSIT, with a mean improvement of 10.30), and SNOT-22
(baseline score of 52, with a mean improvement of 20.96
points). Dupilumab reduced systemic corticosteroid use and
need for sinus surgery versus placebo, and in those with
comorbid asthma, dupilumab improved lung function
(FEV 1) and asthma control (Asthma Control Questionnaire—
5). Results showed that nasal polyp, SNOT-22, and olfaction
scores improved significantly in both dupilumab arms starting at week 4, and effects continued for 1 year during treatment in SINUS-52. In SINUS-24, symptoms returned after
cessation of treatment, as soon as 12 weeks after cessation.

Injection site reactions were the most common treatmentassociated adverse event, which occurred at a higher frequency in the dupilumab-treated group, and nasopharyngitis
was the most common treatment-emergent adverse event
across all treatment groups. Overall, as compared with dupilumab administered every 2 weeks followed by every 4
weeks, the 300-mg dose administered every 2 weeks yielded
better sustained improvements in the objective measures of
the NPS and Lund-Mackay CT score and fewer breakthrough treatment-emergent adverse events of worsening of
nasal polyps, asthma, and sinusitis; the drug was also well
tolerated.**

In the pooled safety population, the incidence of adverse
events emerging during the 24-week treatment period was
lower in the dupilumab-treated group than in the placebo
group. The most commonly reported adverse events were
nasopharyngitis, nasal polyps, headache, asthma, epistaxis,
and injection site erythema; these events were more frequent
with placebo. In both studies, and consistent with previous
dupilumab studies, there was a transient increase in mean
blood eosinophil counts in those treated with dupilumab. In
SINUS-52, eosinophil counts returned to baseline levels by
the end of the 52-week treatment period.*”

There is an ongoing single-center, single-blinded study
being conducted in adult patients with AERD that is assessing the efficacy and safety of dupilumab in treating symptoms of CRS. All participants are being treated with SC
dupilumab (300 mg) every 2 weeks for 7 months and will
continue their background medications for CRS with nasal

polyposis and asthma. The primary outcome of this trial is
SNOT-22 score.*° Of note, all studies have excluded patients
with suspected allergic fungal rhinosinusitis.

Omalizumab. Several trials have demonstrated that omalizumab is effective in allergic and nonallergic participants with
nasal polyps and asthma. A pilot study by Penn and Mikula
examined whether anti-IgE therapy was efficacious in the
treatment of nasal polyposis. Data were retrospectively collected on 2 groups of patients with atopic asthma and nasal
polyposis who underwent endoscopic sinus surgery (ESS),
including a control group (n = 4) and an anti-IgE treatment
group (n = 4), who received omalizumab postoperatively.
Both groups were evaluated by sinus CT and nasal endoscopic examination, and comparisons were made between
the groups with respect to differences in the recurrence of
nasal polyposis after ESS. Collectively, the participants
showed a direct relationship between nasal polyposis severity and pretreatment total serum IgE levels. Relative to preoperative values, the NPSs significantly improved in the
omalizumab group, whereas the control group showed no
significant improvement. This pilot study established that
endoscopic nasal polyposis severity directly correlates to
total serum IgE levels and that inclusion of anti-IgE therapy
in the postpolypectomy management of atopic asthma may
reduce the severity of nasal polyposis recurrence.’

A later trial of 24 allergic and nonallergic patients with
CRSwNP and asthma focused on change in polyp score at
16 weeks. There was a significant decrease in total nasal
endoscopic polyp scores after 16 weeks in the omalizumabtreated group (improvement of 2.67), and secondary endpoints demonstrated Lund-Mackay CT score improvement
from 17.6 to 13.6 after 16 weeks in the omalizumab-treated
group. The omalizumab-treated group also had improvement
in quality-of-life scores based on the Short-Form Health
Questionnaire, 31-item Rhinosinusitis Outcome Measuring
Instrument, and Asthma Quality of Life Questionnaire, irrespective of the presence of allergy. Study patients were
selected by the presence of nasal polyps and asthma, irrespective of the presence of allergy. Nevertheless, omalizumab was equally efficacious in allergic and nonallergic
patients with nasal polyps and asthma in this study.”

In a small randomized double-blind placebo-controlled
clinical trial by Pinto et al, participants with CRS despite
treatment—including surgery, intranasal steroids, and systemic steroids—were randomized to receive omalizumab or
placebo for 6 months. The primary outcome was quantitative
measurement of sinus inflammation on imaging (LundKennedy Scoring System). Secondary outcome measures
included quality of life, symptoms, cellular inflammation,
nasal airflow (nasal peak inspiratory flow), and olfactory
testing (UPSIT). Patients diagnosed with CRS with total IgE
levels between 30 and 700 IU/mL were dosed by weight and
IgE levels every 4 weeks for a 6-month study duration. The
omalizumab-treated group showed reduced inflammation
with no such change in the placebo-treated group; also, the
Damask et al

 

omalizumab-treated group used significantly fewer courses
of steroids over the length of the study as compared with the
placebo group, with a trend toward less antibiotic use.**

Two multicenter double-blind randomized placebo-controlled
trials of omalizumab in participants with CRSwNP completed enrollment in March 2019.45 POLYP 1 and POLYP
2 are replicate phase III studies designed to determine the
efficacy and safety of omalizumab as compared with placebo in adults with CRSwNP who had an inadequate
response to standard-of-care treatment. Both were multicenter
randomized double-blind placebo-controlled trials, with POLYP
1 enrolling 138 participants and POLYP 2 enrolling 127
with NPS scores >5 (pooled average, 6.3) and baseline
SNOT-22 scores >20 (pooled average, 59.8). Other baseline characteristics for the studies included blood eosinophils >250 cells/L and total serum IgE >100 IU/mL for
both studies. The primary outcomes for both trials were
change from baseline in average daily nasal congestion
score at week 24 and change from baseline in NPS at week
24. Participants in the studies were administered omalizumab or placebo by SC injection every 2 to 4 weeks based
on IgE levels and weight. These trials also included a considerable number of secondary outcomes, such as change in
total nasal symptom score, olfaction as assessed by UPSIT,
quality of life, and need for surgery.

Results from these 2 important trials were published*®
after the roundtable meeting. In these 2 phase III studies,
omalizumab met co—primary endpoints and multiple key secondary endpoints. Omalizumab significantly improved
health-related quality of life, smell, congestion, endoscopic
nasal polyp size, postnasal drip (posterior rhinorrhea score),
and runny nose (anterior rhinorrhea score). Positive therapeutic effects were observed as early as week 4. There were
no new or unexpected safety signals identified, and the
safety profile in these studies was consistent with the known
safety profile for omalizumab. The data suggest that omalizumab may be a promising new therapy for the treatment of
CRSwNP in patients refractory to first-line therapies.*” It is
speculated that omalizumab may also gain FDA approval for
the indication of CRSwNP in 2020 (fourth quarter) or 2021
(first quarter).

An open-label crossover extension of these omalizumab
trials is ongoing. Specifically, the extension is evaluating the
safety, efficacy, and durability of response of omalizumab in
an open-label setting in adult participants with CRSwNP
who completed the 2 double-blind placebo-controlled phase
III studies described earlier (POLYP 1 and POLYP 2). After
enrollment into the open-label crossover extension, participants will receive 28 weeks of omalizumab dosing before
entering a 24-week off-treatment observation phase.**

A real-life small study by Bidder et al examined omalizumab as a treatment for coexistent CRSwNP and asthma.
Adult patients with CRSwNP and severe allergic asthma
with total IgE levels between 30 and 1500 kU/mL (n = 13)
received omalizumab every 2 or 4 weeks based on weight
and IgE levels and were matched with a surgery group (n =
24), who did not receive omalizumab. Assessment of SNOT
22 and the Asthma Control Questionnaire—7 scores was performed at 4 and 16 weeks of treatment in those treated with
omalizumab and compared with those in the postsurgery
group.

Both groups had baseline eosinophils >500 cells/yL and
total serum IgE median >250 IU/L, with 77% in the
omalizumab-treated group and 63% in the surgery group
having aspirin sensitivity. The median SNOT-22 at baseline
was 52 (range, 27-78) in the omalizumab group and 70
(range, 26-104) in the surgery-only group. Omalizumab led
to a rapid improvement in the SNOT-22 in patients with
CRSwNP. This improvement was seen early postomalizumab and sustained with continued treatment. There was no
statistical difference in the median SNOT-22 between the
omalizumab- and surgery-treated groups. Rapid asthma improvement occurred alongside as reflected in the significantly decreased Asthma Control Questionnaire—7 at 4 and
16 weeks of treatment.”

Mepolizumab. Three studies have examined the impact of
mepolizumab on severe CRSwNP. The first assessed 30 participants with severe CRSwNP with grade 3 or 4 polyps or
recurrent polyps following sinus surgery. Participants were
randomized to receive 2 single doses of intravenous (IV)
mepolizumab (750 mg) or placebo 28 days apart. The primary outcome was change in NPS; secondary outcomes
included symptoms and molecular markers of eosinophilic
inflammation in serum and nasal secretions. At 48 weeks,
polyp scores were significantly lower in the mepolizumab
group as compared with placebo. Although CT scan scores
and clinical symptoms showed trends toward improvement,
neither reached statistical significance. Serum markers of
eosinophilic inflammation were significantly lower in the
mepolizumab-treated group, but nasal secretions demonstrated mixed results in the treatment arm. Side effects were
mild and not significantly different between groups.
Overall, this small trial demonstrated a favorable improvement in nasal polyp burden among patients with CRSwNP
who were treated with mepolizumab.”?

In a subsequent mepolizumab trial, 103 patients with
CRSwNP who failed treatment with daily INCS and were
deemed to be surgical candidates (defined by an NPS of at
least 2 on one side and 3 on the other, as well as symptoms
>7 on a visual analog scale) were randomized to receive 6
doses of IV mepolizumab (750 mg) 28 days apart or placebo.
Both arms received daily INCS. The primary outcome in this
study was the need for nasal polyp surgery. At enrollment,
100% of patients were candidates for surgery. However, at
completion of the 25-week treatment period, 70% in the
mepolizumab group met criteria for surgery versus 90% in
the placebo group. Secondary outcome measures showed significant improvements with mepolizumab treatment. These
included improved symptom severity as measured by visual
analog scale score, endoscopic NPS, and SNOT-22 scores.
However, there was no difference between groups in olfaction, pulmonary function, or non—disease-specific quality
of life. The safety profile of mepolizumab was comparable
Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

 

to placebo. Overall, this study demonstrated a favorable
improvement in nasal polyp treatment for some patients
with CRSwNP.*!

There is an active randomized double-blind parallelgroup phase III study, SYNAPSE, investigating SC mepolizumab (100 mg) every 4 weeks for 52 weeks as an add-on to
maintenance treatment in 413 adults with severe bilateral
nasal polyposis. In this study, the study group and the placebo group are receiving a standard of care for nasal polyposis, which consists of daily MF nasal spray and, if required,
saline nasal douching, occasional short courses of high-dose
OCS, and/or antibiotics. In addition, up to the first 200 randomized participants will be followed monthly for up to 6
months after the last dose, to assess maintenance of response
and to validate a physiologic model derived from a previous
phase II study. The primary outcomes include a change from
baseline in total endoscopic NPS at week 52 and change
from baseline in mean nasal obstruction visual analog scale
score during the 4 weeks prior to week 52. This trial was
scheduled to be completed in December 2019.

Reslizumab. A small 3-arm phase I study of reslizumab randomized 24 participants with CRSwNP to receive placebo
or a single infusion of reslizumab at 3 mg/kg or | mg/kg.
NPSs decreased in half the treated patients for up to 4
weeks, but these differences were not statistically significant. However, pretreatment IL-5 levels in nasal secretions
predicted response to reslizumab treatment, a promising
finding in the search for biomarkers that could help select
appropriate patients for treatment with this biologic therapy.
In this early-phase study, 96% of patients had at least 1 nonsevere adverse event, most commonly an upper respiratory
tract infection, with no significant difference between the
study groups and placebo group. Overall, the intervention
was safe and well tolerated.°*

Benralizumab. A phase II study of benralizumab in 63 participants with eosinophilic CRS was completed in 2017. The
primary outcome of this trial was change in NPS at week
12, and secondary outcomes included change in CT scores,
treatment discontinuation, change in eosinophil count, and
change in nasal airway resistance.** The results of this trial
have not been published.

An ongoing single-center phase II trial of 32 patients
CRS and eosinophilic polyposis is examining the effect of
SC benralizumab (30 mg) versus placebo on NPS after 6
months of treatment. Secondary outcomes include nasal
polyp size by CT, SNOT-22, olfaction, eosinophil count,
time to surgery, and dropout rate. This trial was scheduled to
be completed in June 2020.°° OSTRO, a phase III trial of
benralizumab in patients with severe nasal polyposis, is also
ongoing. This study comprised 400 patients who were still
symptomatic despite standard-of-care therapy, including current use of INCS and prior surgery and/or use of systemic
corticosteroids. Patients were randomized to receive SC benralizumab (30 mg) plus MF or placebo plus MF over 56
weeks of treatment. The primary outcome measures in this
trial are the effect of benralizumab on nasal polyp burden, as

measured by the NPS and patient-reported nasal blockage
score, the latter of which is assessed in a daily diary by
asking patients to rate the severity of their worst nasal blockage over the past 24 hours. Secondary outcomes include
quality of life, nasal polyp surgery, systemic corticosteroid
use for relief of nasal symptoms, and nasal symptom scores.
In addition, the first 200 participants who complete the
56-week treatment will have a 6-month follow-up period
without dosing. The trial was scheduled to be completed in
September 2020.°°

Where Do Biologics Fit in the Treatment
Paradigm of CRSWNP?

Current guidelines recommend topical corticosteroids, shortterm systemic corticosteroids, antibiotics, and nasal saline irrigations as potential medical treatment options for CRS.??*? In
general, patients whose CRS is inadequately controlled with
medical therapy should be treated with surgery.

There is a high recurrence of nasal polyposis following
ESS: a recent multicenter study revealed 35% recurrence at
6 months and 40% at 18 months.°’ Several potential risk factors for polyp recurrence, including AERD, atopy, eosinophilia, and asthma, have also been associated with worse
outcomes.°* These clinical factors exhibit a type 2 endotype
that is amenable to treatment directed at T2 cytokines.

Endotyping of CRS could help identify which patients
exhibit T2 inflammation and would likely respond to current
biologic therapies targeting cytokines IL-4/IL-13 and IL-5 as
well as IgE. The presence of other type 2 inflammatory diseases may be suggestive of an endotype, but optimally,
serum or tissue markers for biologic therapy targets could
help select the appropriate candidates for treatment. For the
currently available biologic therapies targeting type 2
inflammation, patients should exhibit a type 2 endotype.

The role of biologic therapies in the treatment of medically and surgically refractory CRSwNP is promising given
the favorable data in clinical trials. Dupilumab demonstrated
a reduction in NPS and improvement in nasal congestion
and olfaction in clinical trials. Other biologics are currently
being studied and are expected to gain FDA approval.
Comparative studies with medical and surgical therapies will
be needed to ultimately determine the appropriate place for
biologics in treatment algorithms.

Current trials investigated use for 24 or 52 weeks; however, with a chronic disease that fluctuates over the course of
years, it is presumed that longer-term treatment will be
needed to achieve sustained outcomes. Recurrence of CRS
symptoms and polyps was seen within a few months of stopping these agents, confirming that continuous treatment will
be needed to achieve long-term improvement with these
interventions alone. As with any chronic treatment regimen,
concerns about long-term safety profiles and costs are significant factors in deciding to undergo treatment.

There are many unanswered questions regarding the place
for biologics in the treatment algorithms for CRSwNP:
Which patients should be considered appropriate candidates
Damask et al

 

CRSwNP
ich Gum Pe <=) | Controied |

 

 

Shared decision making

 

 

 

 

 

Asthma comorbiditie:

 

 

 

 

Compl

 

 

 

Not Controlled pat EN | controlled |

Not Controlled

os

Restart Algorithm

 

Figure 5. Proposed pathway for the treatment of chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyposis (CRSwNP).

for treatment with biologics? Which patients will respond to
biologics? Should biologics be considered before considering surgical therapies?

The current ICAR recommendation for revision surgery
for patients with refractory CRSwNP includes failure of
appropriate medical therapy for 3 to 4 weeks.** This recommendation is also a reasonable consideration for use of a biologic agent in refractory CRSwNP. A proposed pathway for
treatment of CRSwNP with biologic agents (Figure 5)
includes appropriate medical therapy for a minimum of 3 to
4 weeks prior to initiation of a biologic agent. Comorbidities, suitability for surgery, and a shared decision-making
approach are all factors included in the proposed algorithm.

The decision to use a biologic agent should include consideration of other comorbid conditions for which these
agents have known benefit. For example, a patient with
severe persistent asthma and CRSwNP would be an ideal
candidate. This would also include patients who have risk
factors for severe recurrent nasal polyp disease, such as
those with severe AERD or numerous prior surgical procedures with rapid polyp recurrence.

For patients who are considered poor surgical candidates,
biologics may be an ideal treatment option. Patients with
endotypes that have worse treatment outcomes, such as
severe AERD, might be considered candidates for biologic
use post- or preoperatively.

With all the uncertainty remaining in this new and promising treatment option, a shared decision-making approach
is essential for clinicians to allow patients to make informed
decisions with the best available evidence and accepted
uncertainty regarding long-term outcomes and risks. The
patient’s decision to undergo sinus surgery, as opposed to
continuing with medical therapy, was demonstrated to be
based on the severity of baseline disease-specific quality of
life, as measured by the SNOT-22.°° Patients with more
severe quality-of-life index self-selected to undergo surgery

in studies. Patients may self-select biologics rather than surgery if presented the option in an shared decision-making
approach with consideration of the efficacy, risks, and financial implications for long-term treatment. There is a need for
development of biomarkers for CRSwNP that will help predict patient-specific treatments and to monitor response to
such treatments.

The Unified Airway

CRSwNP is often associated with asthma. The upper and
lower airways share similar histology and inflammatory
infiltrates.°° The immunopathologic features of CRSwNP,
allergic rhinitis, and asthma share similar T2 immune
response features,°' and there is a well-documented epidemiologic link between allergic rhinitis and asthma.” There
is also significant clinical evidence that treatment of rhinosinusitis results in improved outcomes for concurrent lower
airway disease.°*°° Thus, in treating upper respiratory disease such as nasal polyposis, the lower airways should also
be considered.

Moderate to Severe Asthma
Definition and Treatment

Asthma is a heterogeneous disease characterized by chronic
airway inflammation. Asthma severity is determined by pulmonary function and the level of treatment that is required to
control symptoms and exacerbations. In general, patients
with moderate to severe persistent asthma require daily treatment with medium- or high-dose inhaled corticosteroid in
conjunction with a long-acting bronchodilator. Poor symptom control and/or frequent exacerbations (>2/year) requiring oral steroids or serious exacerbations (>1/year) requiring
hospitalization, despite appropriate daily inhaled medications, warrant consideration of adding a biologic to the treatment regimen.
10

Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

 

Table |. Pivotal Trials Supporting Approved Indications for Asthma.

 

Biologic agent Inclusion criteria

Effects and outcomes Notable findings

 

Omalizumab: IgE 12-75 y old, asthma inadequately
controlled with ICS. Positive SPT to DF,
DP, cockroach, dog, or cat. Total IgE
30-700 IU/mL

18-75 y old, asthma inadequately
controlled with ICS + LABA, LTRA, or
cromolyn. ACQ >1.5. Sputum EOS >3%

18-82 y old, asthma inadequately
controlled with ICS + | additional
controller. >2 exacerbations in past year
treated with OCS. EOS >150 cells/wL at
screening; >300 cells/j.L within past year

12-75 y old, asthma inadequately
controlled with ICS + LABA. >2
exacerbations in past year

>18 y old, asthma inadequately controlled
on medium to high dose with ICS +

Reslizumab: IL-5

Mepolizumab: IL-5

Benralizumab: IL-5

 

Dupilumab: IL-4/13

 

LABA. >| exacerbation in past year

Reduced exacerbations (40% overall /
60% if EOS >300 cells/L). Improved
QOL. Decreased ICS use. Decreased
asthma symptoms

Reduced exacerbations (approximately
50%-60%). Improved FEV! (0.100
Improved responses with
JFeNO and EOS >300
cell/wL. Improvement in
FEVI less consistent

Greatest improvement in
FEVI of all 3 anti-IL-5

0.160 L) agents
Reduced exacerbations (47%-53% Most efficacious with EOS
overall / 79% if EOS >500 cells/L). >500 cell/wL

Improved FEVI (0.100 L overall /
0.122 L if EOS >500 cell/L)

Reduced exacerbations (28%-5 1%).
Improved FEV! (0.100-0.160 L)

Efficacy correlates with
increased EOS

Most effective if EOS
>300 cell/wL

Reduced exacerbations (60%-80%).
Improved FEV! (0.150-0.160 L)

 

Abbreviations: ACQ, Asthma Control Questionnaire; DF, Dermatophagoides farinae; DP, Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus; EOS, eosinophils; FeNO, fractional
exhaled nitric oxide; FEVI, forced expiratory volume in | second; ICS, inhaled corticosteroid; IgE, immunoglobulin E; IL, interleukin; LABA, long-acting betaagonist; LTRA, leukotriene receptor antagonist; OCS, oral corticosteroid; QOL, quality of life; SPT, skin prick test.

Several biomarkers can be used to help guide patient
management. Peripheral eosinophil count is used as a criterion for several biologic therapies for asthma. Blood eosinophils >150 to 400 cells/L are associated with response to
treatment with omalizumab, mepolizumab, benralizumab,
reslizumab, and dupilumab.® Fractional exhaled nitric
oxide (FeNO) >25 to 50 ppb is another biomarker that is
associated with steroid responsiveness and T2 airway
inflammation.°’ Sputum eosinophils have the strongest correlation with T2-high asthma, but this marker is more difficult to assess from a technical standpoint. Specific IgE
identifies the presence of atopy, and it is measured with a
skin prick test or serum-specific IgE. Total IgE is easily
measured and provides additional phenotypic information
that is different from peripheral eosinophil count.°?

In patients with severe asthma, specific comorbidities can
influence the choice of biologic therapy. For example, CRS
with or without polyposis is common in moderate to severe
asthma, and AD occurs frequently in people with allergic
asthma. Allergic sensitization to allergens such as pets, dust
mites, grass, and pollen should also be noted and their relevance established.”

Approved Indications for Asthma Treatment
With Biologics
Currently, various biologics are available for the add-on treat
ment of moderate and severe persistent asthma (Table 1).
These include the anti-IgE agent omalizumab; the anti-IL-5

agents reslizumab, mepolizumab, and benralizumab; and
the anti-IL4/13 agent dupilumab. Clinical trials for these
agents enrolled patients with moderate and/or severe persistent asthma who were already being treated with inhaled
corticosteroids and other adjuncts. Some studies enrolled
patients with OCS-dependent asthma. While the clinical trials
varied in design, consistent findings in the actively treated
groups included a reduction in asthma exacerbations and
improvement in pulmonary function. Studies of omalizumab
showed that it could improve asthma symptoms and reduce
overall inhaled steroid requirements.’"”* Omalizumab had a
favorable impact on quality of life, pulmonary function,
unscheduled outpatient visits, and hospitalizations.’*”4

Studies of reslizumab on patients with asthma’~”” showed
that IV reslizumab significantly relieved asthma symptoms
and improved asthma-related quality of life.

Studies of mepolizumab showed that it significantly reduced
eosinophil counts.*° Mepolizumab treatment also resulted in a
significantly lower rate of exacerbations requiring hospitalization or an emergency department visit,S’ improved diseasespecific quality of life,*? reduced oral glucocorticoid dose
requirements, and demonstrated long-term safety.**

Studies of benralizumab**’ showed that patients with
noneosinophilic disease did not improve with treatment.
However, reduction in exacerbations and improved FEV1
and asthma symptom score are seen in patients with eosinophils >300 cells/L.°° Improvements can be maintained over
an 8-week dosing interval,’' including a reduction in OCS
use for patients with severe, uncontrolled OCS-dependent
Damask et al

 

Table 2. Monoclonal Antibodies for Use in Asthma.

 

Omalizumab! Mepolizumab*

Reslizumab? Benralizumab* Dupilumab*”

 

Mechanism of Anti-lgE Anti-IL-5
action

Biomarker/test Blood EOS >150
cells/L or history
of blood EOS >300

cells/wL

IgE 30-700 IU/mL
requirement

Patient population >6 y old with

moderate to

> 6y old with
severe asthma
severe asthma
Administration

Route SC-lyo; PFS SC-lyo; PFS and Al at
home
Dosing schedule q2w/q4w q4w

Anti-IL-5 Anti-IL-SRa Anti-IL-4Ra

Blood EOS >400 Blood EOS >300 Blood EOS >150

cells/L cells/wL (phase III cells/L or FENO
data); company >25 ppb
messaging, >150
cells/wL
>18 y old with 212 y old with > 12 y old with

severe asthma severe asthma moderate to

severe asthma

PFS in office and Al
at home

PFS and PFP at
home

IV (phase III PFS SC
trial failed)
q4w

q8w (after 3 q4w qzw

doses)

 

Abbreviations: Al, autoinjector; EOS, eosinophils; FeNO, fractional exhaled nitric oxide; IgE, immunoglobulin E; IV, intravenous; PFS, prefilled syringe; PFP, prefilled pen; q2w, every 2 weeks; q4w, every 4 weeks; q8w, every 8 weeks; SC, subcutaneous; SC-lyo, subcutaneous lyophilized powder.

eosinophilic asthma. Benralizumab studies have also demonstrated long-term safety: no new consequences of long-term
eosinophil depletion occurred, and the incidence of other
adverse events (including opportunistic infections) was similar during the second year of treatment.

Studies of dupilumab in asthma treatment have shown
a beneficial effect on asthma control (Asthma Control
Questionnaire—5) and symptoms.” Those with baseline eosinophils >300/uL or FeNO >25 ppb showed the greatest
benefit in FEV1, but an asthma exacerbation reduction of
37% and 68% was seen among intervention patients with
eosinophils <300.°*"* Dupilumab treatment has also been
demonstrated to reduce oral steroid requirements.”

Which to Choose?

As clinicians start to relate the observable characteristics
(phenotypes) present in patients to the mechanisms driving
disease (endotypes) through the use of biomarkers, this will
allow them to better understand how mechanisms of disease
can give rise to many of the characteristic features of severe
asthma. Identifying asthmatic patients by phenotype and,
ideally, endotype—truly bringing us into the realm of precision medicine—will result in a thoughtful approach to
choosing a biologic for patients with moderate to severe
asthma. For our patients with T2 asthma, this means that
there are now novel, targeted treatment options that have
demonstrated reduced asthma exacerbations. Many factors
need to be taken into account when creating an individualized treatment plan, particularly the likelihood of treatment
responsiveness as well as patient preferences.

As we move into this era of personalized (precision) medicine, patients are playing a larger role in their health care.
Shared decision making plays a crucial part in the decision
of which biologic to choose.°°°’ Shared decision making is

an approach where clinicians and patients share the best
available evidence when faced with the task of making decisions and where patients are supported to consider options to
achieve informed preferences.

Some factors to discuss with patients when choosing their
treatment option include the following: patient age (currently,
omalizumab and mepolizumab have an indication down to 6
years of age), frequency of dosing (every 2, 4, or 8 weeks),
route of administration (SC vs IV), importance of weightbased dosing, and location of administration (dupilumab, the
autoinjector form of mepolizumab, and the benralizumab pen
can be self-administered at home; the others require treatment
in a medical office setting; Table 2). Of course, our treatment
choices are influenced by other factors, including cost and
insurance coverage issues. Existence of poorly controlled
comorbidities that can be treated by these agents should also
be taken into consideration.

For allergic uncontrolled asthma in patients with a perennial allergen sensitization, omalizumab is currently a good
choice for therapy. Choice of anti-IL-5 agent may be limited
by peripheral eosinophil count. Although there is no strict
eosinophil cut point for dupilumab, studies suggest better
therapeutic response with higher eosinophil counts or elevated FeNO. All the biologics demonstrated an improvement
in their primary endpoints of asthma exacerbations, but there
were differences in their secondary endpoints, including lung
function and symptoms. There are currently no approved targeted therapies for non-T2 asthma.

Choosing the right biologic for the right patient is challenging. Comparative head-to-head studies would be ideal;
however, these are unlikely to occur. We are left with “‘real
world’’ studies, meta-analyses, network meta-analyses, and
our own clinical experience to help guide us in our decisions
in choosing the right biologic.
12

Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

 

Aspirin-Exacerbated Respiratory Disease
Definition and Diagnosis

One example of tightly linked upper and lower respiratory
inflammatory disease is AERD. AERD (or N-ERD in many
European countries) is defined by acute upper and lower
respiratory tract reactions triggered by nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and this reaction is contingent on cyclooxygenase | inhibition. Patients with AERD
typically have CRSwNP and asthma. AERD is considered to
be a distinct endotype of asthma and CRSwNP.”® Diagnosis of
AERD begins with report of respiratory symptoms triggered
by NSAID exposure.””!” If the history of respiratory symptoms after NSAID exposure is unconvincing or the presence
of chronic airway disease is uncertain, oral aspirin challenge
or similar challenge can be performed to establish the
diagnosis. '°!

Management

Treatment of AERD includes the use of oral and topical/
inhaled corticosteroids, leukotriene modifiers, ASA desensitization, and ESs,!

Biologics and AERD

Monoclonal antibodies are potential therapies in the treatment of AERD because these cases are so difficult to control
with current treatment approaches. In a prospective cohort
study of 21 patients, Hayashi et al noted that omalizumab
administration produced a significant decrease in concentration of urinary LTE4 and a PGD2 metabolite in a postsurgical AERD population and helped to ameliorate upper and
lower respiratory tract symptoms.!°

A small retrospective study of mepolizumab for patients
with AERD demonstrated positive results. Fourteen participants who received at least 3 doses of mepolizumab were
included, and outcomes such as absolute eosinophil count,
SNOT-22 and ACT scores, and FEV1 were investigated.
After receipt of at least 3 doses of mepolizumab, the absolute eosinophil count decreased significantly; SNOT-22
decreased by 17.7 points; and the ACT score significantly
increased by 5.1. FEV1 percentage predicted increased by
6.3%. During this time, no patients required sinus surgery,
and none needed to start or increase their dose of oral corticoids. This is the first study to show the efficacy of mepolizumab in patients with AERD.'™ However, this retrospective
analysis of mepolizumab in AERD has limitations: it was not
randomized, blinded, or placebo controlled, and it involved
patient-reported data.

A substudy on AERD from a phase II trial of dupilumab
was conducted by Laidlaw et al. Results for 19 patients with
self-reported AERD were analyzed (8 in the dupilumabtreated group and 11 in the placebo group). At baseline,
those with AERD had significantly higher Lund-Mackay CT
scores than those without AERD (21.2 vs 17.5). Patients
with AERD had worse olfactory function as measured by
UPSIT score. This substudy by Laidlaw et al demonstrated
that treatment with dupilumab improved UPSIT score by 10,

led to a 30-point reduction in the SNOT-22 score, and
reduced the NPS by 2.5 points.'°°

Eosinophilic Granulomatosis With
Polyangiitis
Definition and Diagnosis

EGPA is defined by eosinophil-rich and necrotizing granulomatous inflammation/vasculitis that often involves the
respiratory tract and other organ systems.'°° EGPA is distinguished from other small-vessel vasculitides by the presence
of severe asthma and blood and tissue eosinophilia.’°”
EGPA onset typically occurs in middle age among patients
with asthma and eosinophilia, who go on to develop vasculitis. Laboratory findings for patients with EGPA generally
include eosinophilia >10% or >1000 cells/L, increased
erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, IgE, rheumatoid factor, and antinuclear antibody. There is perinuclear
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody positivity in 30% to
40% of patients with EGPA, and this is associated with renal
involvement, neuropathy, and biopsy-proven vasculitis.!°*

The diagnosis of EGPA relies primarily on clinical parameters.'°”:!!° The following criteria have been suggested for
diagnosing and documenting EGPA:

A history or presence of asthma
Blood eosinophil level of 10% or an absolute eosinophil count >1000 cells/wL
e The presence of >2 of the following features:
o Biopsy: eosinophilic vasculitis
© Biopsy: perivascular eosinophilic infiltration
or eosinophil-rich granulomatous inflammation
© Neuropathy (mono- or polyneuropathy via motor
deficit or nerve conduction abnormality)
Pulmonary infiltrates
Sinonasal abnormality
Cardiomyopathy
Glomerulonephritis (hematuria, red cell casts,
proteinuria)
o Alveolar hemorrhage (by bronchoalveolar
lavage)
Palpable purpura
o Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody positivity
(anti-MPO [myeloperoxidase], perinuclear
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody)

oo00

Management

Treatment of EGPA should begin as early as possible.
Steroids inhibit eosinophil colony growth and survival as
well as cytokine production, making these drugs effective in
>90% of patients with EGPA. However, some patients do
not respond to steroids, and even among patients in whom
these drugs are effective, EGPA often recurs with steroid
withdrawal. As a result, very few patients with EGPA can
fully discontinue steroid treatment. When EGPA affects critical organs, patients are usually treated with corticosteroids
Damask et al

 

combined with another immunosuppressive drug, such as
cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, or azathioprine.

Approved Indications for EGPA Treatment

With Biologics

Mepolizumab is indicated for treatment of adults with
EGPA. The recommended dose of mepolizumab for patients
with EGPA is 300 mg administered once every 4 weeks as 3
separate 100-mg SC injections into the upper arm, thigh, or
abdomen.!!!

Pivotal Trials Supporting Approved Indications

Mepolizumab. Mepolizumab’s indication for use in treating
adults with EGPA was based on findings from the randomized placebo-controlled MIRRA trial.'!* This double-blind
parallel-group trial enrolled EGPA patients aged >18 years
with a history of relapsing or refractory disease who were
taking stable prednisolone/prednisone for >4 weeks. The
52-week trial included administration of SC mepolizumab
(300 mg) plus standard of care (n = 65) or placebo plus
standard of care (n = 65). Primary efficacy endpoints were
total accrued weeks of remission (defined as Birmingham
Vasculitis Activity Score''? of 0 and prednisolone/prednisone dose <4 mg/d) over 52 weeks and the proportion of
participants in remission at weeks 36 and 48. Secondary
endpoints included time to first relapse of EGPA and average corticosteroid dose during weeks 48 to 52.

During the trial, the mepolizumab arm demonstrated significantly more weeks of accrued remission, a higher remission rate by week 12, and a longer time to first major
relapse. Median daily glucocorticoid dosing was lower
among patients treated with mepolizumab, starting in week 5
of the trial and continuing for 8 weeks beyond the treatment
period. Mepolizumab improved asthma control scores
(Asthma Control Questionnaire—6) starting in week 4 of the
trial, and these differences were present at 12 of 13 time
points over the course of the trial. In contrast, Birmingham
Vasculitis Activity Scores differed little between the treatment arms, and findings for SNOT-22 scores were mixed
during follow-up.

Chronic Spontaneous Urticaria
Definition and Diagnosis

CSU (or CIU [chronic idiopathic urticaria]) is characterized
by hives with or without angioedema for >6 weeks with no
apparent external trigger. CSU lesions are typically edematous pink or red wheals of variable size and shape with surrounding erythema, and they are generally pruritic. Individual
urticarial lesions usually fade within 24 to 48 hours, but new
lesions may develop simultaneously at other sites. The diagnosis of CSU is made thorough history and physical examination; diagnostic testing is not usually warranted.!!+1!°

Management

H,-antihistamines are the mainstay of treatment for CSU,
and nonsedating antihistamines are preferred. In some cases,
antihistamine doses up to 4 times the labeled dose are
required for adequate symptomatic control.'!* Potential addon treatments include leukotriene receptor antagonists, systemic corticosteroids, cyclosporine, dapsone, and methotrexate; these all lack approval for CSU and have low-quality
clinical evidence supporting their use. Long-term use of systemic corticosteroids is not recommended in patients with
CSU. In patients unresponsive to antihistamines, current
guidelines recommend the use of omalizumab.

Approved Indications for Urticaria Treatment

With Biologics

Omalizumab. Omalizumab is an anti-IgE antibody that is
FDA approved for treatment of CSU in adults and adolescents >12 years of age who remain symptomatic despite H,
antihistamine treatment. In CSU, omalizumab is administered at 150 mg or 300 mg SC every 4 weeks independent
of serum IgE and body weight. The appropriate duration of
therapy for CSU has not been determined, so patients must
be reassessed periodically to determine the need for continued therapy. The pivotal trials that supported the CSU indication are summarized in Table 3.!!°1!8

Moderate to Severe AD

Definition and Diagnosis

Diagnosis of AD is made clinically on the basis of historical
features, distribution and morphology of skin lesions, and
associated clinical signs. Laboratory testing is used occasionally to exclude alternate diagnoses. The American Academy
of Dermatology clinical guidelines!!” require the presence of
4 key features for diagnosis: pruritus, eczema, a chronic or
relapsing history, and typical morphology and age-specific
distribution patterns. Facial, neck, and extensor eczematous
lesions are seen in infants and children; flexural lesions are
seen in any age group; and the groin and axillary regions are
spared. Additional features that support the diagnosis of AD
include early age of onset, presence of atopy, personal and/
or family history of AD, IgE reactivity, and xerosis (dry
skin).

Management

AD is characterized by a relapsing and remitting nature,
with periods of relative improvement interspersed with periods of flares or exacerbations over many years. Management
of AD involves maintenance therapy and treatment of
exacerbations. Bathing, moisturization, and trigger avoidance strategies are the main nonpharmacologic interventions.
Topical prescription medications include topical corticosteroids, topical calcineurin inhibitors, and crisaborole ointment.
14

Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

 

Table 3. Pivotal Trials Supporting Approved Indications for Omalizumab for CSU.

 

 

Trial Study design Inclusion criteria Primary outcome Effects
ASTERIA! Evaluate efficacy and safety of 12-75 y old with uncontrolled Change from baseline in a Diminished clinical
(N = 329) omalizumab (75 mg, 150 mg, CSU for 8 mo despite weekly ISS at week 12 symptoms and signs
300 mg) or placebo. Double- approved doses of H,- of CSU
blind treatment period was antihistamines
24 wk
ASTERIA Il Evaluate efficacy and safety of >12 y old with uncontrolled Change from baseline in a Diminished clinical
(N = 323) omalizumab (75 mg, 150 mg, CSU for 6 mo despite weekly ISS at week 12 symptoms and signs
300 mg) or placebo. Double- approved doses of H,- of CSU
blind treatment period was antihistamines
12 wk
GLACIAL Evaluate efficacy and safety of 12-75 y old with uncontrolled Asses safety of omalizumab in Diminished clinical
(N = 336) omalizumab (300 mg) vs CSU for 8 mo despite those with different add-on symptoms and signs

placebo

treatment with H,antihistamines at up to 4 times
the approved dose plus H2antihistamines, LTRAs, or both

therapies. Key efficacy
endpoint was change in mean
weekly ISS at week 12

of CSU. Similar
adverse events
between omalizumab
and placebo groups

 

Abbreviations: CSU, chronic spontaneous urticaria; ISS, itch severity score; LTRA, leukotriene receptor antagonist.

Approved Indications for AD Treatment With Biologics

Dupilumab is FDA approved for treatment of patients aged
>6 years with moderate to severe AD whose disease is not
adequately controlled with topical prescription therapies or
when those therapies are not advisable. Dupilumab can be
used with or without topical corticosteroids. In adults, an initial dose of 600 mg SC is administered as two 300-mg injections in different injection sites, followed by 300 mg SC
every 2 weeks. The most common adverse reactions are
injection site reactions, conjunctivitis, blepharitis, oral
herpes, keratitis, eye pruritus, other herpes simplex virus
infection, and dry eye.'*°

Pivotal Trials Supporting Approved Indications

Three clinical trials of dupilumab treatment led to the current
indication in patients with AD. These trials are summarized
in Table 4.171"?

 

Clinical Practicalities of Using Biologics

Clinicians should ensure that they have the staff, equipment,
and knowledge to prepare, store, and administer these treatments; to monitor the effects of treatment; and to recognize
and treat adverse effects at the point of administration and
over the entire course of treatment. Given the many
unknowns of biologic therapies—including optimal patient
selection, timing of treatment, costs, and unknown long-term
risks—it is important to include a patient-centered decisionmaking approach when considering treatment. Biologic agents
have different dosing schedules, and patient preference may
play a role in choosing the agent employed. Insurance coverage and out-of-pocket costs will also factor into whether
patients can receive biologic therapies (Table 5).

Omalizumab

Although omalizumab is indicated for asthma and CSU, the
dosing in these 2 patient populations differs. In asthma, the
dose and dosing frequency are determined by body weight
and serum total IgE level before the start of treatment. By
contrast, in CSU, omalizumab (150 or 300 mg) is administered every 4 weeks, independent of serum IgE or body
weight. Omalizumab has 2 formulation options: a prefilled
syringe and a powder formulation that requires reconstitution
with sterile water.

Omalizumab must be administered in a health care setting
by health care providers prepared to manage life-threatening
anaphylaxis. Anaphylaxis has been reported in 0.1% to 0.2%
of patients, a side effect that resulted in a black box warning.
The Omalizumab Joint Task Force recommended that
patients be kept under observation for 2 hours for the first 3
injections and 30 minutes for each subsequent injection.
However, these observation periods can be modified by a
physician’s clinical judgment after discussion of risks with
the patient.'*? Discontinuation of omalizumab is recommended if patients experience a severe hypersensitivity
reaction.

Mepolizumab

Mepolizumab dosing for asthma in patients >12 years old is
SC 100 mg; in patients 6 to 11 years old, it is 40 mg every 4
weeks independent of weight and eosinophil levels.
Mepolizumab is available as a lyophilized powder for reconstitution in sterile water, but it is also available in a prefilled
syringe or an autoinjector for at-home administration. For
patients with EGPA, the 300-mg dose requires three 100-mg
injections administered at least 5 cm apart.
Damask et al 15

 

Table 4. Pivotal Trials Supporting Approved Indications for Dupilumab for AD.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Trial Study design Inclusion criteria Primary outcome Effects
SOLO | Evaluate efficacy of > 18 y old with moderate to Percentage with 38% in q2w arm and 37% in
(N = 671) dupilumab 300 mg q2w severe AD inadequately IGA score of 0 or qlw arm had IGA score of
(after 600-mg loading controlled with topical I (clear or almost 0 to |. 51% in q2w arm and
dose), dupilumab 300 mg treatment; chronic AD for clear) at 16 wk 52% in ql w arm achieved
qlw (after 600-mg loading at least 3 y; and IGA score EASI-75
dose), placebo of 3or4
SOLO 2 Evaluate efficacy of > 18 y old with moderate to Percentage with 36% in q2w arm and 36% in
(N = 708) dupilumab 300 mg q2w severe AD inadequately IGA score of 0 or qlw arm had IGA score of
(after 600-mg loading controlled with topical I at 16 wk 0 to 1. 44% in q2w arm and
dose), dupilumab 300 mg treatment; chronic AD for 48% in qlw arm achieved
qlw (after 600-mg loading at least 3 y; and IGA score EASI-75
dose), placebo of 3or4
CHRONOS Evaluate dupilumab > 18 y old with moderate to Percentage with 64% in qlw arm + TCS and
(N = 740) treatment and concomitant severe AD inadequately IGA score of 0 65% in q2w + TCS arm
TCS: dupilumab 300 mg controlled with topical or | sustained EASI -75. 39% in
qlw + TCS, dupilumab 300 treatment; chronic AD for qlw arm had IGA score of
mg q2w + TCS, placebo + at least 3 y; and IGA score 0 to | at 26 wk and 39% in
TCS. Determine efficacy of 3 q2w arm had IGA score 0
and long term safety or | at 16 wk

 

Abbreviations: AD, atopic dermatitis; EASI-75, improvement of >75% in Eczema Area and Severity Index; IGA, Investigators Global Assessment; qlw, every
week; q2w, every 2 weeks; TCS, topical corticosteroid.

Table 5. Monoclonal Antibodies and Their FDA-Approved Indications.

 

 

Monoclonal antibody: mechanism of action Patient type Dosing
Asthma
Omalizumab: IgE (at Fce3) IgE, 30-700; positive SPT for at least | perennial SC q2w to q4w based
allergen; moderate to severe asthma. Age >6 y on IgE and weight
Mepolizumab: IL-5 Blood EOS >300 within 12 mo or >150 within SC q4w
6 wk; severe asthma. Age >6 y
Reslizumab: IL-5 Sputum EOS >3%; blood EOS >400; severe IV q4w
asthma. Age >18 y
Benralizumab: IL-SRa Severe asthma; >| exacerbation/y; EOS >300. SC q8w (first 3 doses
Age >12y monthly)
Dupilumab: IL-4Ra Moderate to severe asthma with an eosinophilic SC q2w

phenotype or with OCS-dependent asthma
regardless of phenotype. Age >12 y
Atopic dermatitis

Dupilumab: IL-4Ra Moderate to severe AD. Age >6 y SC q2w
Chronic spontaneous urticaria

Omalizumab: IgE Moderate to severe CSU. Age >12 y SC q4w
Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis

Mepolizumab: IL-5 EGPA on stable oral steroids. Age >18 y SC q4w
CRSwNP

Dupilumab: IL-4Ra CRSwNP in adults whose disease is not SC q2w

controlled. Age >18 y

 

Abbreviations: AD, atopic dermatitis; CRSWNP, chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyposis; CSU, chronic spontaneous urticaria; EGPA, eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis; EOS, eosinophils; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; IgE, immunoglobulin E; lV, intravenous; OCS, oral corticosteroids; q2w, every 2
weeks; q4w, every 4 weeks; q8w, every 8 weeks; SC, subcutaneous; SPT, skin prick test.
16

Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

 

Herpes zoster has occurred in patients receiving mepolizumab in controlled clinical trials, and vaccination should be
considered if medically appropriate. Patients with preexisting helminth infections should be treated prior to mepolizumab therapy. Reports of anaphylaxis have been received in
postmarketing surveillance.

Reslizumab

Reslizumab is indicated for treatment of patients aged >18
years with severe asthma and eosinophils >400. Reslizumab
is administered as an IV infusion over 20 to 50 minutes, and
dosing is weight based. Anaphylaxis occurred in 0.3% of
treated subjects in placebo-controlled studies; malignancies
were noted in 0.6% of treated subjects versus 0.3% of placebo; and helminth and parasitic infections have been
observed. Patients with preexisting helminth infections must
be treated before initiating reslizumab. If patients become
infected while taking reslizumab and do not respond to antihelminth treatment, reslizumab treatment should be discontinued until the infection resolves.

Benralizumab

Benralizumab is indicated for treatment of severe eosinophilic asthma in patients aged >12 years. This medication is
administered by SC injection, and dosing is independent of
weight and eosinophil levels. The recommended dose is 30
mg once every 4 weeks for the first 3 doses, then once every
8 weeks thereafter. Patients with preexisting helminth infections should be treated before initiating therapy with benralizumab. Benralizumab can be administered by a health care
professional; however, there is an additional option for athome administration with a benralizumab pen.

Dupilumab

Dupilumab is indicated for moderate to severe asthma (or
OCS-dependent asthma, regardless of phenotype) in patients
>12 years old, moderate to severe AD in patients >6 years
old, and adults with uncontrolled CRSwNP. Dupilumab has
different dosing schedules for patients with AD, asthma, and
CRSwNP. For adults with AD, dupilumab is not weight or
eosinophil based, but in adolescents aged 12 to 17 years with
AD, it is dosed above and below 60 kg with 200- and 300-mg
doses available. For AD, in the pediatric (6-11 years of age)
population, dupilumab is given either every 2 weeks (200 mg)
or four weeks (300 mg), based on weight, following an initial
loading dose. For patients aged 12 to 17 years with asthma,
either dose can be used, but if patients are OCS dependent or
if they have comorbid AD, the 300-mg dose is suggested.
There is no loading dose for CRSwNP. The medication is delivered in prefilled syringes or prefilled pens for SC administration.
Conjunctivitis was the most frequently reported adverse event
in trials of this drug, with most patients recovering relatively
quickly. For patients with asthma, clinicians should be alert to
vasculitic rash, worsening pulmonary symptoms, cardiac complications, and/or neuropathy in patients with eosinophilia, as
these may be associated with a reduction of OCSs.

 

Conclusion

Biologic therapy provides a new and promising modality for
patients with severe eosinophilic diseases (asthma, CRSwNP,
AERD, EGPA) and other inflammatory conditions, such as
AD and CSU. Clinical trials have demonstrated that these biologic agents improve objective and subjective parameters of
disease, particularly in severe cases. At the same time, biologic therapy appears to reduce the need for systemic steroid
treatment and the attendant risks of these steroids.

The introduction of multiple biologic agents in a relatively short period has resulted in a number of unanswered
questions regarding optimal use. The costs of new biologic
agents should be balanced against their relative benefits.
Costs are a factor in any long-term treatment, and biologic
agents are expensive. Cost-utility analysis is a common type
of cost-effectiveness analysis in which quality-adjusted life
years (QALYs) are used as the measure of benefit. In the
United States, therapies are generally considered costeffective at ceilings of $50,000 to $150,000.'*4

A recent report by the Institute for Clinical and Economic
Review (ICER)!*> for the treatment of asthma associated
with type 2 inflammation concluded that biologic agents provide gains in quality-adjusted survival over standard care
alone; however, they seem to be priced higher than the modeled benefits over a lifetime horizon at commonly accepted
cost-effective thresholds. The ICER base case incremental
cost-effectiveness ratio analysis found that biologics range
from $325,000 to $391,000 (2018 dollars) per QALY
gained. ICER defines a value-based benchmark for a drug as
the price that would achieve incremental cost-effectiveness
ratios between $100,000 to $150,00 per QALY gained. No
biologic agent achieved the likelihood of meeting that
threshold. The ICER report recommended that biologic costs
would need to be reduced to 62% to 80% from their 2018
wholesale acquisition cost, depending on the biologic to
meet this threshold. Biologics do need to become costeffective for patients to have access to therapy long-term.
Scangas et al evaluated the cost-effectiveness of dupilumab
versus ESS for patients with CRSwNP and found that the
ESS strategy cost $50,436.99 and produced 9.80 QALYs.
The dupilumab treatment strategy cost $536,420.22 and produced 8.95 QALYs. With 1-way sensitivity analyses, the
authors determined that ESS was cost-effective versus dupilumab, regardless of the frequency of revision surgery and at
any yearly cost of dupilumab above $855.'7°

In general, initiation of biologic treatment should depend
on a failure of conventional treatments. Thus, medication
adherence, frequency of exacerbations, and severity of
symptoms need to be thoroughly evaluated before the use of
a biologic agent is considered. In nasal polyp disease, the
adequacy of previous surgery should also be assessed.
Disease phenotype/endotype should be elucidated to the
extent possible to help determine the appropriate biologic
agent to employ. Therefore, biomarkers are needed to aid in
selection of the most appropriate biologic agents for a
patient. Ideally, these biomarkers would also be able to
Damask et al

17

 

predict response and track improvement. Finally, the identification of new endotypes through biomarkers would allow
for new biologic therapies that could target specific pathways beyond those currently available.

The introduction of biologic therapies has led to groundbreaking improvements for patients with severe inflammatory diseases that are important in allergy and rhinology.
These biologic agents are finding an important place in our
treatment paradigms.

Author Contributions

Cecelia C. Damask, coordination of project, preparation work for
roundtable discussion, presentation of assigned topics to the roundtable, participation in roundtable discussion, contributed to creation
of manuscript, and editing of manuscript; Matthew W. Ryan, preparation work for roundtable discussion, presentation of assigned
topics to the roundtable, participation in roundtable discussion,
contributed to creation of manuscript, and editing of manuscript;
Thomas B. Casale, preparation work for roundtable discussion,
presentation of assigned topics to the roundtable, participation in
roundtable discussion, contributed to creation of manuscript, and
editing of manuscript; Mario Castro, preparation work for roundtable discussion, presentation of assigned topics to the roundtable,
participation in roundtable discussion, and contributed to creation
of manuscript; Christine B. Franzese, preparation work for roundtable discussion, presentation of assigned topics to the roundtable,
participation in roundtable discussion, and contributed to creation
of manuscript; Stella E. Lee, preparation work for roundtable discussion, presentation of assigned topics to the roundtable, participation in roundtable discussion, and contributed to creation of
manuscript; Joshua M. Levy, preparation work for roundtable discussion, presentation of assigned topics to the roundtable, participation in roundtable discussion, contributed to creation of
manuscript, and editing of manuscript; Sandra Y. Lin; preparation
work for roundtable discussion, presentation of assigned topics to
the roundtable, participation in roundtable discussion, and contributed to creation of manuscript; Peter A. Lio, preparation work for
roundtable discussion, presentation of assigned topics to the roundtable, participation in roundtable discussion, contributed to creation
of manuscript, and editing of manuscript; Anju T. Peters, preparation work for roundtable discussion, presentation of assigned topics
to the roundtable, participation in roundtable discussion, contributed
to creation of manuscript, and editing of manuscript; Michael P.
Platt, preparation work for roundtable discussion, presentation of
assigned topics to the roundtable, participation in roundtable discussion, contributed to creation of manuscript, and editing of
manuscript; Andrew A. White, preparation work for roundtable
discussion, presentation of assigned topics to the roundtable, participation in roundtable discussion, contributed to creation of
manuscript, and editing of manuscript.

Disclosures

Competing interests: Cecelia C. Damask: ALK—advisory board;
AstraZeneca—contracted clinical research; Audigy Medical—
consultant; GSK—contracted clinical research, speaker’s bureau;
OptiNose—contracted clinical research, speaker’s bureau. Thomas
B. Casale: Sanofi/Regeneron—advisory board, principal investigator on studies to university; Novartis—advisory board, principal

investigator on studies to university; Genentech—advisory board,
principal investigator on studies to university; AstraZeneca—advisory
board. Mario Castro: 4D Pharma—consultant; ALA—university/
grant funding; AstraZeneca—industry-sponsored studies/speaker;
Aviragen—consultant; Boehringer-Ingelheim— industry-sponsored
studies/speaker; Boston Scientific—consultant/speaker; Chiesi—
industry-sponsored studies; Elsevier—royalties; Genentech—
consultant/speaker; GSK—industry-sponsored _ studies/speaker;
Mallincrodt—consultant; National Institutes of Health—university/
grant funding; Novartis—industry-sponsored studies; Nuvaira—
consultant; PCORI—university/grant funding; Regeneron—speaker;
Sanofi—industry-sponsored studies/speaker; Therabron—consultant;
Theravance—consultant; Teva—consultant/speaker; Vectura—
consultant; VIDA—consultant. Christine B. Franzese: ALK—
advisory board, research funding, speaker’s bureau; Allovate—bonds;
Greer—advisory board, research funding, speaker’s bureau; GSK—
advisory board, research funding, speaker’s bureau; Merck—tesearch
funding; Genentech-Novartis/Roche—tesearch funding; OptiNose—
advisory board, research funding, speaker’s bureau; Sanofi/
Regeneron—advisory board, speaker’s bureau. Stella E. Lee:
AstraZeneca—tesearch funding; GSK—tesearch funding; Novartis—
advisory board; Sanofi—advisory board, research funding. Sandra Y.
Lin: Aerin Medical—consultant; Redesign Health—consultant.
Peter A. Lio: AbbVie—consultant, investigator grants/research
funding; Altus Labs—advisory board stock, options; Anacor
Pharmaceuticals, Inc—advisory board; AOBiome, LLC—principal
investigator grants/research funding; Dermavant Sciences—advisory
board; Dermira—consultant; DermTap, Inc—advisory board, stock
options; DermVeda—advisory board, stock options; Eli Lilly &
Co—consultant; Exeltis—consultant; Ferndale Laboratories, Inc—
speaker; Franklin BioScience—consultant, stock options; Galderma
Laboratories, LP—speaker, consultant; gpower—advisory board;
Heel (Biologische Heilmittel Heel GmbH)—consultant; Intraderm
Pharmaceuticals—advisory board; Johnson & Johnson Consumer
Products Company—speaker, advisory board, consultant fees;
Kiniksa Pharmaceuticals, Ltd—consultant, honoraria; La Fondation
pour la DermatiAtopique (Foundation for Atopic Dermatitis)—
principal investigator grants/research funding; La Roche-Posay
Laboratorie Pharmaceutique—speaker; LearnHealth/LearnSkin—
stockholder, stock options; L’Oreal USA Inc—consultant, honoraria;
Medable—stockholder, stock options; Menlo Therapeutics—
advisory board, honoraria; Micreos Human Health BV—advisory
board stock options; Mission—speaker/faculty education; Modernizing Medicine—stockholder, stock options; Odeza LLC—
consultant, stock options; Pfizer Inc—speaker; Pierre Fabre
Dermatologie—speaker; Realm Therapeutics—advisory board;
Regeneron—advisory board, speaker, investigator grants/research
funding; Sanofi US Services—advisory board; Syncere Skin
Systems—advisory board, stock options; Theraplex—consultant;
UCB—advisory board; Unilever—consultant; Valeant Pharmaceuticals
International—consultant; Valeant Pharmaceuticals North America
LLC—speaker. Anju T. Peters: AstraZeneca—advisory board,
research funding; Novartis—advisory board; OptiNose—advisory
board, research funding; Sanofi/Regeneron—advisory board.
Michael P. Platt: GI Reviewers—consultant; Plural Publishing—
royalties. Andrew A. White: AstraZeneca—advisory board, speaker;
OptiNose—advisory board; Regeneron—advisory board, speaker.

Sponsorships: None.

Funding source: American Academy of Otolaryngic Allergy.
18

Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

 

References

1.

 

Johansson SG, Haahtela T, O’Byrne PM. Omalizumab and the
immune system: an overview of preclinical and clinical data.
Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2002;89(2):132-138.

. Sutton BJ, Gould HJ. The human IgE network. Nature. 1993;

366(6454):421-428.

. Heusser C, Jardieu P. Therapeutic potential of anti-IgE antibo
dies. Curr Opin Immunol. 1997;9:805-814.

. Davies AM, Allan EG, Keeble AH, et al. Allosteric mechanism

of action of the therapeutic anti-IgE antibody omalizumab.
J Biol Chem. 2017;292(24):9975-9987.

. Presta LG, Lahr SJ, Shields RL, et al. Humanization of an anti
body directed against IgE. J Immunol. 1993;151(5):2623-2632.

. Henry AJ, McDonnell JM, Ghirlando R, et al. Conformation of

the isolated c3 domain of IgE and its complex with the high
affinity receptor, FcRI. Biochem. 2000;39(25):7406-74 13.

. MacGlashan DW Jr, Bochner BS, Adelman DC, et al. Down
regulation of Fc(epsilon)RI on human basophils during in vivo
treatment of atopic patients with anti-IgE antibody. J Immunol.
1997; 158(3):1438-1445.

. Lin H, Boesel KM, Griffith DT, et al. Omalizumab rapidly

decreases nasal allergic response and FcepsilonRI on basophils.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2004;113(2):297-302.

. Beck LA, Marcotte GV, MacGlashan D, et al. Omalizumab
induced reductions in mast cell Fce psilon RI expression and
function. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2004;114(3):527-530.

. Stokes J, Casale T. Anti-IgE therapy. Accessed April 16, 2019.

https://www.uptodate.com/contents/anti-igetherapy

. Saco TV, Pepper A, Casale TB. Uses of biologics in allergic

diseases: what to choose and when. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol.
2018;120(4):357-366.

. Farne HA, Wilson A, Powell C, et al. Anti-IL5 therapies for

asthma. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;9:CD010834.

. Patterson MF, Borish L, Kennedy JL. The past, present, and

future of monoclonal antibodies to IL-5 and eosinophilic
asthma: a review. J Asthma Allergy. 2015;8:125-134.

. Zeiger RS, Schatz M, Dalal AA, et al. Blood eosinophil count

and outcomes in severe asthma: a prospective study. J Allergy
Clin Immunol Pract. 2017;5:144-153.

. Price DB, Rigazio A, Campbell JD, et al. Blood eosinophil

count and prospective annual asthma disease burden: a UK
cohort study. Lancet Respir Med. 2015;3:849-858.

. Tabatabaian F, Ledford DK, Casale TB. Biologic and new

therapies in asthma. /mmunol Allergy Clin N Am. 2017;37(2):
329-343.

. Menzella F, Lusuardi M, Galeone C, et al. The clinical profile

of benralizumab in the management of severe eosinophilic
asthma. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2016;10(6):534-548.

. Klonowska J, Glen J, Nowicki RJ, Trzeciak M. New cytokines

in the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis—new therapeutic targets. Int J Mol Sci. 2018;19(10):E3086.

. Bagnasco D, Ferrando M, Varricchi G, Passalacqua G,

Canonica GW. A critical evaluation of anti-IL-13 and anti-IL-4
strategies in severe asthma. /nt Arch Allergy Immunol. 2016;
170(2):122-131.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

Strid J, McLean WI, Irvine AD. Too much, too little or just
enough: a goldilocks effect for IL-13 and skin barrier regulation? J Invest Dermatol. 2016;136(3):561-564.

Zuyderduyn S, Ninaber DK, Schrumpf JA, et al. IL-4 and IL13 exposure during mucociliary differentiation of bronchial
epithelial cells increases antimicrobial activity and expression
of antimicrobial peptides. Respir Res. 2011;12(1):59.
Guttman-Yassky E, Bissonnette R, Ungar B, et al. Dupilumab
progressively improves systemic and cutaneous abnormalities
in patients with atopic dermatitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2019;143(1):155-172.

Wenzel S, Ford L, Pearlman D, et al. Dupilumab in persistent
asthma with elevated eosinophil levels. N Engl J Med. 2013;
368:2455-2466.

Rosenfeld RM, Piccirillo JF, Chandrasekhar SS, et al. Clinical
practice guideline (update): adult sinusitis. Otolaryngol Head
Neck Surg. 2015;152(2):S1-S39.

Tomassen P, Vandeplas G, Van Zele T, et al. Inflammatory
endotypes of chronic rhinosinusitis based on cluster analysis of
biomarkers. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2016;137(5):1449-1456.
Benjamin MR, Stevens WM, Li N, et al. Clinical characteristics of patients with chronic rhinosinusitis without nasal polyps
in an academic setting. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2019;
7(3):1010-1016.

Orlandi RR, Kingdom TT, Hwang PH, et al. International consensus statement on allergy and rhinology: rhinosinusitis. /nt
Forum Allergy Rhinol. 2016;6(supp! 1):S22-S209.

Van Zele T, Gevaert P, Holtappels G, et al. Oral steroids and
doxycycline: two different approaches to treat nasal polyps.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2010;125(5):1069-1076, e4.

Hissaria P, Smith W, Wormald PJ, et al. Short course of systemic corticosteroids in sinonasal polyposis: a double-blind,
randomized, placebo-controlled trial with evaluation of outcome measures. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2006;118(1):128-133.
Bonfils P, Avan P, Malinvaud D. Influence of allergy on the
symptoms and treatment of nasal polyposis. Acta Otolaryngol.
2006; 126(8):839-844.

Fokkens WJ, Lund VJ, Mullol J, et al. European position paper
on rhinosinusitis and nasal polyps 2012. Rhinol Suppl. 2012;
23:1-298.

Sindwani R, Han JK, Soteres DF, et al. NAVIGATE I: randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind trial of the exhalation
delivery system with fluticasone for chronic rhinosinusitis with
nasal polyps. Am J Rhinol Allergy. 2019;33(1):69-82.

Lund VJ, Mackay IS. Staging in rhinosinusitus. Rhinology.
1993;31(4):183-184.

Barnes PJ, Casale TB, Dahl R, Pavord ID, et al. The Asthma
Control Questionnaire as a clinical trial endpoint: past experience and recommendations for future use. Allergy. 2014;69(9):
1119-1140.

Jia CE, Zhang HP, Lv Y, et al. The Asthma Control Test and
Asthma Control Questionnaire for assessing asthma control:
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2013;131(3):695-703.

Bachert C, Mannent L, Naclerio RM, et al. Effect of subcutaneous dupilumab on nasal polyp burden in patients with
Damask et al

19

 

3%

38.

39.

 

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

. Penn R, Mikula S. The role of anti-[gE immunoglol

. ClinicalTrials.gov. A clinical

chronic sinusitis and nasal polyposis a randomized clinical
trial. JAMA. 2016;315(5):469-479.

Han JK, Bachert C, Desrosiers M, et al. Efficacy and safety of
dupilumab in patients with chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal
polyps: results from the randomized phase 3 SINUS-24 study.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2019;143(2):AB422.

Bachert C, Desrosiers M, Mullol J, et al. A randomized phase 3
study, SINUS-52, evaluating the efficacy and safety of dupilumab in patients with severe chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal
polyps. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2019;143(2):AB433.

Bachert C, Han JK, Desrosiers M, et al. Efficacy and safety of
dupilumab in patients with severe chronic rhinosinusitis with
nasal polyps (LIBERTY NP SINUS-24 and LIBERTY NP
SINUS-52): results from two multicentre, randomised, doubleblind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group phase 3 trials. Lancet.
Published online September 19, 2019. doi:10.1016/S01406736(19)31881-1

. ClinicalTrials.gov. Dupilumab for aspirin-exacerbated respira
tory disease. Accessed May 29, 2019. https://clinicaltrials.gov/
ct2/show/NCT03595488

 

ulin therapy in nasal polyposis: a pilot study. Am J Rhinol. 2007;21(4):
428-432.

. Gevaert P, Calus L, Van Zele T, et al. Omalizumab is effective

in allergic and nonallergic patients with nasal polyps and
asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013;131(1):110-116.

. Pinto JM, Mehta N, DiTineo M, Wang J, Baroody FM,

Naclerio RM. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial of anti-IgE for chronic rhinosinusitis. Rhinology. 2010;
48(3):3 18-324.

trial of omalizumab in participants with chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps (POLYP 1).
Accessed May 29, 2019. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT03280550?term=NCT03280550&rank=1
ClinicalTrials.gov. A clinical trial of omalizumab in participants with chronic rhinosinusitus with nasal polyps (POLYP
2). Accessed May 29, 2019. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT03280537?term=NCT03280537 &rank=1

Gevaert P, Omachi TA, Corren J, et al. Efficacy and safety of
omalizumab in nasal polyposis: 2 randomized phase 3 trials. J
Allergy Clin Immunol. Published online June 7, 2020. doi:10.
1016/j.jaci.2020.05.032

Genentech. Xolair (omalizumab) significantly reduced nasal
polyps and congestion symptoms in adults with chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps in two phase III studies. Accessed
October 24, 2019. https://www.gene.com/media/press-releases/
14792/2019-06-02/xolair-omalizumab-significantly-reducedClinicaltrials.gov. An extension study of omalizumab in participants with chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps. Accessed
May 29, 2019. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03478930
Bidder T, Sahota J, Rennie C, et al. Omalizumab treats chronic
rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps and asthma together—a real
life study. Rhinology. 2018;56(1):42-45.

Gevaert P, Van Bruaene N, Cattaert T, et al. Mepolizumab, a
humanized anti-IL-5 mAb, as a treatment option for severe
nasal polyposis. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011;128(5):989-995,
el-e8.

 

Al.

$2.

53.

54.

55.

56.

STs

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

Bachert C, Sousa AR, Lund VJ. Reduced need for surgery in
severe nasal polyposis with mepolizumab: randomized trial. J
Allergy Clin Immunol. 2017;140(4):1024-1031.
ClinicalTrials.gov. Effect of mepolizumab in severe bilateral
nasal polyps. Accessed May 29, 2019. https://clinicaltrials.gov/
ct2/show/NCT03085797?term=mepolizumab+and+tnasal+poly
ps&rank=1

Gevaert P, Lang-Loidolt D, Lackner A, et al. Nasal IL-5 levels
determine the response to anti-IL-5 treatment in patients with
nasal polyps. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2006;118(5):1133-1141.
ClinicalTrials.gov. Study of benralizumab (KHK4563) in patients
with eosinophilic chronic rhinosinusitis. Accessed May 29,
2019. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02772419
ClinicalTrials.gov. Benralizumab effect on severe chronic rhinosinusitis with eosinophilic polyposis. Accessed May 29, 2019.
https://clinicaltrials. gov/ct2/show/NCT03450083?term=NCT034
50083 &rank=1

ClinicalTrials.gov. Efficacy and safety study of benralizumab
for patients with severe nasal polyposis (OSTRO). Accessed
May 29, 2019. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT0340122
9?term=NCT03401229&rank=1

DeConde AS, Mace JC, Levy JM, et al. Prevalence of polyp
recurrence after endoscopic sinus surgery for chronic rhinosinusitis with nasalpolyposis. Laryngoscope. 2017;127(3):550-555.
Batra PS, Tong L, Citardi MJ. Analysis of comorbidities and
objective parameters in refractory chronic rhinosinusitis. Laryngoscope. 2013;123(suppl 7):S1-S11.

Soler ZM, Rudmik L, Hwang PH, et al. Patient-centered decision making in the treatment of chronic rhinosinusitis.
Laryngoscope. 2013;123:2341-2346.

Cingi C, Muluk NB, Cobanoglu B, et al. Nasobronchial interaction. World J Clin Cases. 2015;3(6):499-503.

Okano M, Kariya S, Ohta N, et al. Association and management of eosinophilic inflammation in upper and lower airways.
Allergol Int. 2015;64(2):131-138.

Brozek JL, Bousquet J, Agache I, et al. Allergic rhinitis and its
impact on asthma (ARIA) guidelines—2016 revision. J Allergy
Clin Immunol. 2017;140(4):950-958.
Schlosser RJ, Smith TL, Mace J, Soler ZM. Asthma quality of
life and control after sinus surgery in patients with chronic rhinosinusitis. Allergy. 2017;72(3):483-491.
Ehnhage A, Olsson P, Kélbeck KG, et al. One year after endoscopic sinus surgery in polyposis: asthma, olfaction, and
quality-of-life outcomes. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2012;
46(5):834-841.
Batra PS, Kern RC, Tripathi A, et al. Outcome analysis of
endoscopic sinus surgery in patients with nasal polyps and
asthma. Laryngoscope. 2003;113(10):1703-1706.

Price DB, Rigazio A, Campbell D, et al. Blood eosinophil
count and prospective annual asthma disease burden: a UK
cohort study. Lance Respir Med. 2015;3(11):849-858.

Fahy JV. Type 2 inflammation in asthma—present in most,
absent in many. Nat Rev Immunol. 2015;15:57-65.

Pavlidis S, Takahahis K, Ng Kee Kwong F, et al. ““T2-high” in
severe asthma related to blood eosinophil, exhaled nitric oxide
and serum periostin. Eur Respir J. Published online January 3,
2019. doi:10.1183/13993003.00938-2018

 

 
20

Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

 

69.

70.

71.

yee

Be

74.

Ws

76.

Ts

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

Haughhney J, Morice A, Blyth KG, et al. A retrospective
cohort study in severe asthma describing commonly measured
biomarkers: eosinophil count and IgE levels. Respir Med. 2018;
134:117-123.

Philpott CM, Erskine S, Hopkins C, et al. Prevalence of
asthma, aspirin sensitivity and allergy in chronic rhinosinusitis:
data from the UK National Chronic Rhinosinusitis Epidemiology
Study. Respir Res. 2018;19(1):129.

Busse W, Corren J, Lanier BQ, et al. Omalizumab, anti-IgE recombinant humanized monoclonal antibody, for the treatment of severe
allergic asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2001;108:184-190.

Soler M, Matz J, Townley R, et al. The anti-IgE antibody omalizumab reduces exacerbations and steroid requirement in allergic asthmatics. Eur Respir J. 2001;18(2):254-261.

Finn A, Gross G, van Bavel J, et al. Omalizumab improves
asthma-related quality of life in patients with severe allergic
asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2003;111(2):278-284.

Buhl R, Hanf G, Soler M, et al. The anti-IgE antibody omalizumab improves asthma-related quality of life in patients with
allergic asthma. Eur Respir J. 2002;20(5):1088-1094.

Castro M, Mathur S, Hargreave F, et al. Reslizumab for poorly
controlled, eosinophilic asthma: a randomized, placebo-controlled
study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2011;184(10):1125-1132.
Bjermer L, Lemiere C, Maspero J, et al. Reslizumab for inadequately controlled asthma with elevated blood eosinophil
levels: a randomized phase 3 study. Chest. 2016;150:789-798.
Castro M, Zangrilli J, Wechsler ME, et al. Reslizumab for
inadequately controlled asthma with elevated blood eosinophil
counts: results from two multicentre, parallel, double-blind,

 

randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trials. Lancet Respir
Med. 2015;3:355-366.

Corren J, Weinstein S, Janka L, Zangrilli J, Garin M. Phase 3
study of reslizumab in patients with poorly controlled asthma:
effects across a broad range of eosinophil counts. Chest. 2016;
150:799-810.

Murphy K, Jacobs J, Bjermer L, et al. Long-term safety and
efficacy of reslizumab in patients with eosinophilic asthma.
J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2017;5(6):1572-1581, e3.
Pavord ID, Korn S, Howard P, et al. Mepolizumab for severe
eosinophilic asthma (DREAM): a multicentre, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2012;380(9842):65 1-659.
Ortega HG, Liu MC, Pavord ID, et al. Mepolizumab treatment
in patients with severe eosinophilic asthma. N Engl J Med.
2014;371(13):1198-1207.

Chupp GL, Bradford ES, Albers FC, et al. Efficacy of mepolizumab add-on therapy on health-related quality of life and
markers of asthma control in severe eosinophilic asthma
(MUSCA): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled,
parallel-group, multicentre, phase 3b trial. Lancet Respir Med.
2017;5(5):390-400.

Bel EH, Wenzel SE, Thompson PJ, et al. Oral glucocorticoidsparing effect of mepolizumab in eosinophilic asthma. N Engl
J Med. 2014;371(13):1189-1197.

Lugogo N, Domingo C, Chanez P, et al. Long-term efficacy
and safety of mepolizumab in patients with severe eosinophilic
asthma: a multi-center, open-label, phase IIIb study. Clin Ther.
2016;38(9):2058-2070.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

96.

97.

98.

99.

Castro M, Wenzel SE, Bleecker ER, et al. Benralizumab, an
anti-interleukin 5 receptor a monoclonal antibody, versus placebo for uncontrolled eosinophilic asthma: a phase 2b randomised dose-ranging study. Lancet Respir Med. 2014;2(11):879890.

Ferguson GT, Mansur AH, Jacobs JS, et al. Assessment of an
accessorized pre-filled syringe for home-administered benralizumab in severe asthma. J Asthma Allergy. 2018;11:63-72.
Ferguson GT, FitzGerald JM, Bleecker ER, et al. Benralizumab
for patients with mild to moderate, persistent asthma (BISE): a
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3. trial.
Lancet Respir Med. 2017;5(7):568-576.

Nair P, Wenzel S, Rabe KF, et al. Oral glucocorticoid-sparing
effect of benralizumab in severe asthma. N Engl J Med. 2017;
376(25):2448-2458.

Busse WW, Bleecker ER, FitzGerald JM, et al. Long-term
safety and efficacy of benralizumab in patients with severe,
uncontrolled asthma: 1-year results from the BORA phase 3
extension trial. Lancet Respir Med. 2019;7(1):46-59.

Bleecker ER, FitzGerald JM, Chanez P, et al. Efficacy and
safety of benralizumab for patients with severe asthma uncontrolled with high-dosage inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting
B2-agonists (SIROCCO): a randomised, multicentre, placebocontrolled phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2016;388(10056):2115-2127.
FitzGerald JM, Bleecker ER, Nair P, et al. Benralizumab, an
anti-interleukin-5 receptor « monoclonal antibody, as add-on
treatment for patients with severe, uncontrolled, eosinophilic
asthma (CALIMA): a randomised, double-blind, placebocontrolled phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2016;388(10056):2128-2141.
Wenzel S, Ford L, Pearlman D, et al. Dupilumab in persistent
asthma with elevated eosinophil level. N Engl J Med. 2013;
8(26):2455-2466.

Wenzel S, Castro M, Corren J, et al. Dupilumab efficacy and
safety in adults with uncontrolled persistent asthma despite use
of medium-to-high-dose inhaled corticosteroids plus a long-acting
beta2 agonist: a randomised double-blind placebo-controlled pivotal phase 2b dose-ranging trial. Lancet. 2016;388(10039):3 1-44.
Castro M, Corren J, Pavord ID, et al. Dupilumab efficacy and
safety in moderate-to-severe uncontrolled asthma. N Engl J
Med. 2018;378(26):2486-2496.

Rabe KF, Nair P, Brusselle G, et al. Efficacy and safety of
dupilumab in glucocorticoid-dependent severe asthma. N Engl
J Med. 2018;378(26):2475-2485.

Elwyn G, Frosch D, Thomson R, et al. Shared decision
making: a model for clinical practice. J Gen Intern Med. 2012;
27(10):1361-1367.

Desai M, Oppenheimer J. Choosing the right biologic for
severe asthma: precision medicine through the lens of patientcentered decision making. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. Published
online July 24, 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.anai.2019.07.012

Létvall J, Akdis CA, Bacharier LB, et al. Asthma endotypes: a
new approach to classification of disease entities within the
asthma syndrome. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011;127(2):355-360.
Dursun AB, Woessner KA, Simon RA, Karasoy D, Stevenson
DD. Predicting outcomes of oral aspirin challenges in patients
with asthma, nasal polyps, and chronic sinusitis. Ann Allergy
Asthma Immunol. 2008;100(5):420-425.

 

 
Damask et al

21

 

 

00.

01.

02.

03.

04.

05.

06.

07.

08.

09.

10.

11.

12;

13.

14.

Sezceklik A, Nizankowska E, Duplaga M. Natural history of
aspirin induced asthma. Eur Resp J. 2000;16(3)432-436.
Kowalski ML, Agache I, Bavbek S, et al. Diagnosis and management of NSAID-exacerbated respiratory disease (N-ERD):
a EAACI position paper. Allergy. 2019;74(1):28-39.

White AA, Stevenson DD. Aspirin-exacerbated respiratory
disease. N Engl J Med. 2018;379(11):1060-1070.

Hayashi H, Mitsui C, Nakatani E, et al. Omalizumab reduces
cysteinyl leukotriene and 9a,118-prostaglandin F2 overproduction in aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease. J Allergy
Clin Immunol. 2016;137(5):1585-1587.

Tuttle KL, Buchheit KM, Laidlaw TM, Cahill KN. A retrospective analysis of mepolizumab in subjects with aspirinexacerbated respiratory disease. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract.
2018;6(3):1045-1047.

Laidlaw TM, Mullol J, Fan C, et al. Dupilumab improves
nasal polyp burden and asthma control in patients with CRSwNP
and AERD. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2019;7:2462-2465.
Jennette JC, Falk RJ, Bacon PA, et al. 2012 Revised
International Chapel Hill Consensus Conference Nomenclature
of Vasculitides. Arthritis Rheum. 2013;65(1):1-11.
Mouthon L, Dunogue B, Guillevin L. Diagnosis and classification of eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (formerly named Churg-Strauss syndrome). J Autoimmunity. 2014;
48-49:99-103.
Sablé-Fourtassou R, Cohen P, Mahr A, et al; French
Vasculitis Study Group. Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies and the Churg-Strauss syndrome. Ann Intern Med. 2005;
143(9):632-638.
Groh M, Pagnoux C, Baldini C, et al. Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Churg-Strauss) (EGPA) Consensus
Task Force recommendations for evaluation and management.
Eur J Intern Med. 2015;26(7):545-553.

Cottin V, Bel E, Bottero P, et al. Respiratory manifestations
of eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (ChurgStrauss). Eur Respir J. 2016;48(5):1429-1441.

GSK. Mepolizumab prescribing information. Accessed May
14, 2019. https://www.gsksource.com/pharma/content/dam/
GlaxoSmithKline/US/en/Prescribing_Information/Nucala/pdf/
NUCALA-PI-PIL.PDF

Wechsler ME, Akuthota P, Jayne D, et al. Mepolizumab or
placebo for eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis. NV
Engl J Med. 2017;376(20):1921-1932.

Mukhtyar C, Lee R, Brown D, et al. Modification and validation of the Birmingham Vasculitis Activity Score (version 3).
Ann Rheum Dis. 2009;68(12):1827-1832.

Zuberbier T, Aberer W, Asero R, et al. The EAACI/GA?LEN/
EDF/WAO guideline for the definition, classification, diagnosis and management of urticaria. Allergy. 2018;73(7):1393-1414.

 

115.

116.

117.

118.

119.

120.

121.

122.

123:

124.

125.

126.

Bernstein JA, Lang DM, Khan DA, et al. The diagnosis and
management of acute and chronic urticaria: 2014 update.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2014;133(5):1270-1277.

Saini SS, Bindslev-Jensen C, Maurer M, et al. Efficacy and
safety of omalizumab in patients with chronic idiopathic/
spontaneous urticaria who remain symptomatic on H1 antihistamines: a randomized, placebo-controlled study. J Invest
Dermatol. 2015;135(1):67-75.

Maurer M, Rosén K, Hsieh HJ, et al. Omalizumab for the
treatment of chronic idiopathic or spontaneous urticaria. N
Engl J Med. 2013;368(10):924-935.

Kaplan A, Ledford D, Ashby M, et al. Omalizumab in patients
with symptomatic chronic idiopathic/spontaneous urticaria
despite standard combination therapy. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2013;132(1):101-109.

Eichenfield LF, Tom WL, Chamlin SL, et al. Guidelines of
care for the management of atopic dermatitis: section 1.
Diagnosis and assessment of atopic dermatitis. J Am Acad
Dermatol. 2014;70(2):338-351.

Food and Drug Administration. Dupilumab package insert.
Accessed May 29, 2019. https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/
drugsatfda_docs/label/2017/761055lbl.pdf

Simpson EL, Akinlade B, Ardeleanu M. Two phase 3 trials of
dupilumab versus placebo in atopic dermatitis. N Engl J Med.
2017;376(11):1090-1091.

Blauvelt A, de Bruin-Weller M, Gooderham M, et al. Longterm management of moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis
with dupilumab and concomitant topical corticosteroids
(LIBERTY AD CHRONOS): a 1-year, randomised, doubleblinded, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2017;
389(10086):2287-2303.

Cox L, Platts-Mills TA, Finegold I, et al. American Academy
of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology/American College of
Allergy, Asthma and Immunology Joint Task Force Report on
omalizumab-associated anaphylaxis. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2007;120(6):1373-1377.

Neumann PJ, Cohen JT. QALYs in 2018: advantages and concerns. JAMA. 2018;319:2473-2474.

Institute for Clinical and Economic Review. Biologic
Therapies for Treatment of Asthma Associated With Type 2
Inflamation: Effectiveness, Value, and Value-Based Price
Benchmarks: Final Evidence Report. Published 2018. Accessed
May 29, 2019. https://icer-review.org/material/asthma-finalevidence-report/

Scangas GA, Wu AW, Ting JY, et al. Cost utility analysis of
dupilumab versus endoscopic sinus surgery for chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps. Laryngoscope. Published online
April 3, 2020. doi:10.1002/lary.28648
