Original paper

Acute-phase response and its biomarkers in acute

and chronic urticaria

Magdalena Czarnecka-Operacz’, Joanna Szulczyfiska-Gabor’, Kinga Lesniewska’, Ewa Teresiak-Mikotajczak’,
Pawet Bartkiewicz’, Dorota Jenerowicz', Krzysztof Wiktorowicz’, Zygmunt Adamski*

‘Department of Dermatology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland
*Department of Biology and Preservation of Environment, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland

Adv Dermatol Allergol 2018; XXXV (4): 400-407
DOI: https://doi.org/10.5114/ada.2018.77672

Abstract

Introduction: Since urticaria is a persisting inflammatory disease it is important to establish the prognostic factors
for the duration and severity of the disease.

Aim: To evaluate serum concentrations of selected acute-phase proteins (APP) in patients with various forms of
urticaria as compared to healthy volunteers and also to analyze these concentrations in different types of urticaria.
Additionally, to evaluate the correlation between serum levels of selected APP and disease activity.

Material and methods: Serum concentrations of C-reactive protein (CRP), a,-acid glycoprotein (AGP), a,-antichymotrypsin (ACT), a.,-antitrypsin (AT), ceruloplasmin (Cp), transferrin (Tf), a,-macroglobulin (a.,M) and haptoglobin
(Hp) were measured. Quantitative measurement was conducted using the rocket immunoelectrophoresis. Disease
activity was assessed with the use of total symptom score.

Results: Analysis of serum APP concentrations revealed statistically higher serum concentrations of CRP, AGP
and ACT in the entire group of patients with urticaria in comparison with the control group. In the entire group of
patients with urticaria, CRP, AGP, ACT, Cp and Hp correlated positively with disease activity, intensity of pruritus
and the number and size of urticarial wheals. Statistically lower serum concentrations of CRP, ACT, Cp and Hp were
detected in the group of patients with acute urticaria (AU) and angioedema together, compared to the patients
suffering from AU only.

Conclusions: Patients with symptoms of various forms of urticaria present a distinct profile of serum APP concentrations. A significant correlation observed between CRP, AGP, ACT, Cp, Hp and clinical activity score points to the
potential role of APP as markers of the urticarial activity.

Key words: chronic urticaria, acute phase reaction, proteins.

Introduction

Urticaria is a disease characterized by the development of wheals, angioedema, or both of these features.
The spectrum of clinical manifestations of different urticaria subtypes is very wide and it is observed that two
or more different subtypes of urticaria can coexist in
1 patient. According to the latest EAACI/GA2LEN/EDF/
WAO [1] guideline, acute urticaria (AU) is defined as the
occurrence of spontaneous wheals, angioedema, or both
for less than 6 weeks. Chronic urticaria (CU) subtypes
include chronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU) and chronic
inducible urticaria (CINDU). Acute-phase response (APR)
is an early, nonspecific but very complex reaction of the
organism following infections, inflammatory processes,
tissue injuries, tumor growth induced for the mainte
 

nance or restoration of homeostasis [2-4]. Clinically APR
exerts multidirectional effects on both humoral and cellular types of immunity as well as on many metabolic processes [5, 6]. Many cytokines such as interleukin-6 (IL-6),
interleukin-1 (IL-1) and tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-ct)
are considered as the main stimulators of APR [7, 8]. Biochemically APR is characterized by changes in serum concentrations of different circulating proteins (acute phase
proteins — APP). Serum concentrations of the most of APP
rise by 25%, whereas serum concentrations of transferrin
(Tf) and a,-glicoprotein (AGP) decrease by 30% during
APR. Some of the circulating APP (e.g. a,-macroglobulin
—a.,M) change insignificantly during APR. The concentration of selected circulating proteins may rise by 50%
(e.g. ceruloplasmin — Cp). In case of a,-antichymotrypsin

 

Address for correspondence: Ewa Teresiak-Mikotajczak, Department of Dermatology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences,
49 Przybyszewskiego St, 60-355 Poznan, Poland, phone: +48 601 957 851, e-mail: ewa.teresiak@wp.pl

Received: 2.05.2016, accepted: 12.07.2017.

400

Advances in Dermatology and Allergology 4, August / 2018
Acute-phase response and its biomarkers in acute and chronic urticaria

 

(ACT), a,-glycoprotein (AGP), haptoglobin (Hp) and
a.,-antitrypsin (AT), a two- or threefold increase in the
serum concentration is observed. The serum concentration of C-reactive protein (CRP) or serum amyloid A (SAA)
increases even 1000 times during APR [7, 8].

Recent studies revealed t!
matory disorder of the skin
degranulation and perivasc

mainly of CD4+ lymphocytes,

sinophils and basophils [2, 7

at CU is a persisting inflamcharacterized by mast cell
ular infiltrations composed
monocytes, neutrophils, eo. The association of changes

in serum concentrations of APP with the severity of inflammation indicates that selected APP may be useful in
diagnosing and monitoring the activity and management
of different diseases. Since CU is a persisting inflammatory disease and due to its often idiopathic background,
it is important to establish the prognostic factors for the
duration and severity of the disease. Identification of the
severity biomarkers will allow selection of patients with
a resistant and refractory course of CU in whom alternative therapies to antihistamines should be used.

 

Aim
The aim of the study was to evaluate serum concentrations of selected APP and their glycosylation profile in
patients suffering from various forms of urticaria as compared to the control group (healthy volunteers). Comparison of APP serum concentrations between different types
of urticaria was also performed. The additional aim was
the evaluation of the correlation between serum levels of
selected APP and urticaria activity, as well as biochemical
findings performed as a diagnostic regimen of urticaria.

 

Material and methods

One hundred and three patients were included in
the study: 15 subjects suffering from AU and 88 subjects
suffering from CU. All the patients were treated in the
Department of Dermatology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences.

Among 103 patients selected, there were 80 women
and 23 men, aged 13 to 79 (mean age: 40 years). The control group comprised only 20 individuals (13 women and
7 men, aged 18 to 41, mean age: 30 years) because of the
problem with enrolling of healthy volunteers with a negative history of urticaria and angioedema. The researchers
were aware that all conclusions based on the results of
the study should be drawn with caution because of the
disproportion between the study and control group.

All the patients underwent the following diagnostic
tests: full blood count with peripheral blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, urine analysis, serum glucose,
hepatic enzymes and creatinine level, antistreptolysin
O titer. In addition, stool examination for parasites, serology tests for toxoplasmosis and toxocarosis, thyroid
gland’s hormones level (thyroid stimulating hormone —

 

 

 

 

 

Advances in Dermatology and Allergology 4, August / 2018

TSH, and free thyroxine — fT4), chest X-ray and abdominal ultrasonography were performed. Moreover, patients
were consulted by the dentist and ENT specialist. Such
screening for patients with urticaria was needed in order
to eliminate patients in whom the elevated concentration of inflammatory mediators might have resulted from
other reasons than urticaria, e.g. hidden foci of infection.
n each patient, a detailed case history was taken
considering the duration of symptoms, activity of urticaria, concomitant angioedema, family history, concomitant diseases and treatment. According to the collected
data, several groups of patients with urticaria were distinguished. Patients suffering from urticaria for up to
6 weeks were classified as the acute type of urticaria
(15 patients). Patients with symptoms of AU during examination received standard treatment (e.g. dexamethasone
iv, clemastine iv). Patients in whom symptoms lasted
for more than 6 weeks were classified as the chronic type
of urticaria (88 patients). Patients suffering from CU were
recommended to discontinue the anti-histaminic drug
7 days before the following provocative testing: autologous serum skin test (ASST), oral provocation with aspirin, intradermal test with penicillin, provocative test with
heat, cold and pressure, and exercise trial. In order to
estimate acute phase reaction biomarkers in the serum
of patients with various types of urticaria, patients were
classified into one of the following types of CU: spontaneous (42 patients), autoimmune (19 patients), inducible
(17 patients), aspirin-exacerbated (10 patients) according
to the results of the diagnostic procedures.

Intradermal ASST was performed according to the
method described by Sabroe et al. [9]. Serum-induced
wheal greater than 1.5 mm than control (physiological
saline) was regarded as positive. A provocative test with
aspirin as well as provocation with physical factors were
performed according to the protocol used in the Dermatology Department of Poznan University of Medical Sciences.

Urticaria activity was assessed with the use of TSS
scale (total symptom score) as described by Lorette
et al. [10]. TTS was calculated in relation to the number
and size of wheals and intensity of pruritus. The biggest
diameter of a single wheal was estimated according to the
following scheme: 0 = 0. cm, 1 = wheals’ diameter < 1.5 cm,
2 = wheals’ diameter > 1.5 cm and 3 = wheals’ diameter > 2.5 cm. The number of wheals was calculated as
follows: 0 = no wheals, 1 = the number of wheals < 10,
2 = the number of wheals > 10, 3 = numerous wheals affecting the whole skin. The pruritus intensity was measured
according to the following pattern: 0 means no pruritus,
1 = mild pruritus, 2 = severe itch not interfering with daily
activity, 3 = very intense itch interfering with daily activity.
The TSS score in the studied group was between 2 and 9.

All blood samples were collected during eruption of
urticarial wheals (in the active phase of disease) by antecubital puncture. The samples were centrifuged and
stored at —20°C.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

401
M. Czarnecka-Operacz, J. Szulczyfska-Gabor, K. Lesniewska, E. Teresiak-Mikotajczak, P. Bartkiewicz, D. Jenerowicz,

K. Wiktorowicz, Z. Adamski

 

Table 1. The number of patients and mean age of patients in studied groups

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Parameter Number of subjects Female : male ratio Mean age [years] Min. age Max. age
Chronic urticaria: 88 67:21 40.4 417.2 13 79
Aspirin-exacerbated 10 Te 38.8 +18.3 B 76
Inducible 7 11:6 29.2 +14.5 14 63
Autoimmune 19 15:4 48.9 +15.9 18 76
Spontaneous 42 34:8 41.5 +16.2 17 79
Acute urticaria 15 13:2 38.7 +17.1 14 79
Control group 20 13:7 30.95 +6.4 18 41

 

Serum concentrations of APP were measured in all
patients from the studied group as well as in healthy
volunteers. The assessed APP were as follows: CRP, AGP,
ACT, AT, Cp, Tf, a,M, Hp. Quantitative measurement was
conducted with the rocket immunoelectrophoresis by
Laurell [11]. The evaluation of glycosylation profiles and
reactivity coefficients (RC) for AGP (AGP-RC) and ACT
(ACT-RC) were done by means of the cross immunoelectrophoresis affinity by Bog-Hansen with concavalin
A (Con A) as a ligand [11].

Serum concentrations of APP and their glycosylation
profiles were measured in the Department of Biology and
Environmental Protection of Poznan University of Medical Sciences.

 

Statistical analysis

The Kruskal-Wallis variance analysis was used to
analyze the differences in serum concentrations of APP
and their glycosylation profiles between the studie
groups of patients. The Mann-Whitney U-test was use
to compare serum concentrations of APP between the
studied groups of patients and healthy volunteers, between groups of patients suffering from particular types
of urticaria, as well as between serum concentrations o
APP and urticaria intensity in studied groups of patients.
The Spearman correlation rank test was used to assess
correlations between serum concentrations of APP an

580

 

560 4

540 4

 

520 +

cp [g/t]

509.2

 

500 4

 

 

480

 

  

 

460 41

 

Acute urticaria Control group

 

Figure 1. Statistically higher mean serum concentrations 0:
Cp in the group of patients with AU (n = 15) comparing with
the control group (p < 0.05)

 

402

TSS as well as between serum concentrations of APP and
selected laboratory parameters.

Results

Among the 103 patients suffering from particular
types of urticaria there were 80 (78%) women and
23 (22%) men. The group of healthy volunteers comprised of 13 (65%) women and 7 (35%) men. The number of patients and the mean age of patients in studied
groups are presented in Table 1.

Among the patients with CU, the aspirin-exacerbated
type comprised 11.4%, inducible type — 19.3%, autoimmune
type — 21.6%, whereas spontaneous urticaria comprised
47.7%. The mean duration of symptoms in patients suffering from AU was 7 days. In most patients with AU (in
8 out of 15 persons; 53.3%) symptoms subsided within
1 or 2 days. The mean duration of the disease in patients
suffering from CU was 28.9 months (min. 2 months, max.
> 10 years). The majority of patients in the CU group had
episodes of urticarial wheals for 6 months, whereas 5 patients experienced urticaria for more than 10 years.

Forty-one (39.8%) subjects in the entire study group
(n = 103) experienced episodes of angioedema associated with urticarial wheals. Eight (53.3%) patients
with AU (nr = 15) had simultaneous episodes of urticaria
and angioedema, while in patients with CU (n = 88), only
33 (37.5%) patients presented symptoms of angioedema.

Analysis of serum APP concentrations and their glycosylation profiles revealed statistically higher (p < 0.05)
serum concentrations of CRP, AGP and ACT in the entire group of patients suffering from urticaria (acute and
chronic type together, n = 103) in comparison with the
control group. Statistically higher values of AGP-RC were
identified in the serum of the whole group of all subjects
with urticaria (rn = 103) in comparison with healthy volunteers (n = 20) (p < 0.05).

In turn, there were statistically higher serum concentrations of CRP, AGP, ACT, Cp and Hp in patients with AU
(n = 15) in comparison with healthy volunteers (p < 0.05)
(Figure 1).

Patients suffering from CU presented statistically
higher serum concentrations of CRP, ACT and Hp vs. the
control group (pp < 0.05).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Advances in Dermatology and Allergology 4, August / 2018
Acute-phase response and its biomarkers in acute and chronic urticaria

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

1200 1400 T
1000 pool |
300 851.6
— 8004
7 OOO Peover e crete | capensis neeumnemnmecenenanense}
£ 6004
& —
mn a
= 400 4 = 800+ 4
E —_—
4 S
200 So) oo tee ee cee need
Or A F
Acute Aspirin Chronic CINDU Ul 400 — a 4
urti- exacer- _urticaria’ bated  caria
urticaria FOG Kosnnnesnanesenernenasrssmemesaronsd aT EET nancorensmmeoeor
Figure 2. The mean serum concentrations of AGP in differ- —
ent types of urticaria. Statistically higher serum concentra- 0 2 !

tions of AGP in AU than in CINDU.

 

 

55: T

45h 4

 

 

357° =

 

 

Tf [g/l]
w
S
T
f

 

 

2.0

 

 

 

157

 

 

 

 

 

 

CU with
angioedema

CU without
angioedema

 

oMedian Standard deviation

 

“L Min—max.

 

 

 

Figure 4. Statistically lower serum concentrations of Tf in
the group of patients with CU and angioedema comparing
to the group of patients with CU only (p < 0.05)

 

Statistically higher serum concentrations of CRP, AGP,
ACT and Hp were also detected in the group of patients
with CSU comparing to healthy volunteers (p < 0.05).
The mean serum concentration of CRP was statistically
higher in patients suffering from the autoimmune type
of urticaria (n = 19) in comparison with the control group
(p < 0.05). In turn, circulating Tf was statistically lower in
autoimmune urticaria vs healthy subjects.

The study also reveale
concentrations of CRP and

statistically higher serum
Hp in patients with CINDU

comparing to healthy volunteers (pp < 0.05).

In addition, we detected
of CRP and ACT in the grou

igher serum concentrations

 

of patients suffering from

Advances in Dermatology and Allergology 4, August / 2018

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

AU without AU with
angioedema angiodedema

 

 

oMedian Standard deviation —] Min—max.

 

 

 

Figure 3. Statistically lower serum concentrations of ACT in
the group of patients with AU and angioedema comparing
to the group of patients with AU only (p = 0.006)

 

aspirin-exacerbated urticaria in comparison with the
control group (jp) < 0.05).

Analysis of serum concentrations of APP in subjects
with different types of urticaria revealed statistically
higher values of AGP and ACT in AU comparing to CINDU
(p = 0.023 and p = 0.026 respectively) and statistically higher values of CRP in AU vs the autoimmune type
(p = 0.031) (Figure 2).

Statistically lower serum concentrations of CRP, ACT,
Cp and Hp were detected in the group of patients suffering from AU and angioedema together, compared to the
patients suffering from AU only (p = 0.006; p = 0.006;
p = 0.02; p = 0.02, respectively) (Figure 3). In the group
of patients suffering from CU associated with angioedema, serum concentrations of Tf were statistically lower
(p < 0.05) than in the group of patients without angioedema (Figure 4).

In the entire group of patients with urticaria (n = 103)
CRP, AGP, ACT, Cp and Hp correlated positively with disease activity (measured by TSS), intensity of pruritus and
the number and size of urticarial wheals (Figure 5).

In patients with AU (n = 15%), serum concentrations of
Tf (r= 0.762; p = 0.001), a.,M (r= 0.743; p = 0.001) and AT
(r = 0.631; p = 0.01) correlated positively with the duration
of the disease, whereas in patients with CU, the duration
of symptoms correlated negatively only with the serum
concentration of ACT (r =—0.214; p = 0.04) (Figure 6).

 

 

 

 

 

Discussion

Contrary to the unified clinical picture, etiopathogenesis of particular types of urticaria has not been fully

403
M. Czarnecka-Operacz, J. Szulczyfska-Gabor, K. Lesniewska, E. Teresiak-Mikotajczak, P. Bartkiewicz, D. Jenerowicz,

K. Wiktorowicz, Z. Adamski

 

 

1000 e
900 e
800 . 8 z :
700 as aie a
600 i :

500
400
300
200

cp [mg/l]

 

 

 

 

4. 5
Tss

a
N
©
Re}
3

Figure 5. Statistically significant correlation between the
serum concentration of Cp and the TSS in patients with
urticaria (acute and chronic type together)

 

50 : on i ee:

AU duration [days]

 

 

 

05 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 5.0
aM [g/l]

Figure 6. Statistically significant correlation between the
serum concentration of a,M and the duration of disease
in patients with AU

 

explained. The new data point to a significant role of inlammatory processes in the development of the disease.
he theory of allergic inflammation explains immunological processes in IgE-mediated diseases such as allergic
asthma, atopic dermatitis, allergic rhinitis and AU [8].
Mechanisms that lead to the histamine release are mulfactorial including allergic and inflammatory reactions.
Mast cells are the source of many pro-inflammatory cyokines such as TNF-a, IL-4, IL-5, IL-1, IL-3, IL-8, IL-10, IL-13,
GM-CSF, MIP-1a, MIP-2@ [8, 12-15]. Therefore, mast
cells are not only effector cells in allergic reactions, but
may also regulate the intensity of these processes [12].
Histamine is one of the mediators of APR and regulates
synthesis and secretion of cytokines responsible for the
ate phase of IgE-mediated allergic inflammation (13, 16].
hus, histamine may influence secretion of specific APP in
different types of urticaria. According to the recent findings, the pattern of cytokines and APR biomarkers seems
‘0 be specific of particular types of urticaria [17-19].

In all types of CU, regardless of the cause, serum concentrations of CRP, ACT and Hp were statistically higher
han in the control group. In patients with AU, serum concentrations of CRP, AGP, ACT, Cp and Hp were statistically
igher comparing with healthy volunteers. There were no
statistically significant differences in serum concentraions between patients suffering from different types of
urticaria and the control group regarding remaining APP
measured during the study. These findings suggest that
mediators of APR may contribute to development of uricarial symptoms and enhance urticarial inflammation.
However, the conclusions should be drawn with caution
ecause of the lack of proportion between the study and
he control group.

We also found elevated serum concentrations of diferent APR biomarkers in all studied types of CU (aspirinexacerbated, CSU, autoimmune, CINDU) creating a diferent pattern of APR biomarkers specific of a particular
ype of urticaria. This leads to the conclusion that disinct mechanisms are responsible for the same clinical

icture in all types of the disease. Among all of analyzed
APP, only the serum concentration of CRP was increased
in all types of urticaria comparing to the control group.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

404

This is in agreement with results of other studies [17, 18,
20]. In turn, elevated levels of Cp were observed only in
patients with AU comparing to healthy volunteers indicating that Cp is a specific biomarker of AU. Cp plays an
important role in histamine metabolism and regulates its
serum concentration [21]. Releasing of histamine in AU is
usually IgE-mediated and results in augmentation of Cp
synthesis [21].

he patients with autoimmune urticaria comprised
the only studied group with serum concentrations of Tf
statistically lower comparing to the control group. Autoantibodies engaged in the pathogenesis of autoimmune
urticaria are directed against a-fragment of a high affinity receptor for IgE (FceRI) or against IgE molecule
and belong to the class of IgG (IgGl, 1gG3). Interaction
of anti-lgE antibodies with IgE molecules bound to FceRI
receptors has multidirectional effects such as degranulation of mast cells or suppression of IgE synthesis by
lymphocytes B [12]. In turn, Tf stimulates lymphocytes T
to produce IgE. A decreased level of Tf may be involved in
pathogenesis of autoimmune urticaria due to its involvement in IgE synthesis and anti-lgE — FceRI interaction.

n the group of patients suffering from aspirin-exacerbated urticaria, we found statistically higher serum
concentrations of CRP and ACT comparing to the control group. Similar results were also obtained by other
authors who found statistically increased levels of CRP
in patients with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs)-induced AU as compared with healthy subjects [19]. The mechanism of this disorder is based on
inhibition of cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1) and formation of
leukotrienes that may act as additional proinflammatory
agents enhancing APR. The ACT acts as an inhibitor of
roteases including chymotryptase released by mast cells
12]. Increased release of proteases from mast cells infiltrating the human skin may result in an increased serum
concentration of ACT in patients suffering from aspirin
intolerance in urticaria. ACT is responsible for reducing
degranulation of mast cells after allergen stimulation.
t influences antigen presentation by Langerhans cells
and modulates lymphocytes activity [22-27]. According
to these data, an increased serum concentration of ACT

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Advances in Dermatology and Allergology 4, August / 2018
Acute-phase response and its biomarkers in acute and chronic urticaria

 

may lead to limitation of urticarial symptoms. According
to some authors, the imbalance between proteases synthesis and their inhibitors is responsible for inducing or
developing symptoms of many different diseases [28, 29].

There are some reports suggesting that protease inhibitor deficiency, mainly AT, is responsible for developing
urticaria. The study conducted by Doeglas and Bleumink
on 92 cases of CU revealed a statistically lower serum
concentration of AT in patients with cold urticaria and
in urticaria associated with angioedema [30]. The same
authors examined 281 patients and demonstrated that
CU is characterized by a lower serum concentration of AT
comparing to healthy subjects. It led to the conclusion
that a lower serum concentration of AT may predispose
to developing certain types of CU [31]. This is in agreement with the results of Imai study according to which
a lower serum concentration of AT was characteristic of
patients with spontaneous urticaria [32]. There are also
some studies reporting statistically lower serum concentrations of AT in patients with cholinergic urticaria
[33]. Probably increased activity of protease inhibitors
inactivating proteases released from mast cell leads to
a decrease in their concentrations in patients with urticaria [32]. However in our study we did not find any
statistically differences in the serum concentration of AT
between patients with different types of urticaria and
the control group. Similarly, Chodirker et al. did not find
any significant decrease in the AT level within the group
of patients suffering from spontaneous or cold-induced
urticaria vs the control group [34].
We also detected a statistically higher serum level
of Hp in patients with CINDU comparing to the control
group. Ping et al. described an increased expression of
Hp mRNA in the skin of patients with certain inflammatory dermatoses such as psoriasis, lichen planus vs.
healthy skin. On the contrary, autoimmune skin disorders
like lupus erythematous, pemphigus or pemphigoid were
characterized by a significantly decreased expression of
Hp mRNA vs. healthy skin [35]. Hp modulates the functions of the immune system, it acts mainly on Langerhans and mast cells and may be engaged in pathogenesis of urticaria.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A moderate increase in t
correlated with a higher risk
metabolic syndrome and col
findings are also described

e CRP level (3-10 mg/l) is
of cardio-vascular disease,
on carcinoma [36]. Similar
for myocardial infarction,

 

graft vs. host reaction, vesse

s disease, and rheumatoid

arthritis [37]. Lin also observed increased CRP serum concentrations in 11 analyzed cases of CU [38]. C-reactive
protein is considered to be a sensitive marker of inflammation [27], which according to Lin’s study correlates
with the concentration of IL-6 in serum of the healthy
population, as well as in the study group [39]. Du Clos
suggested a protective role of CRP in the immune system. It acts as an inhibitor of autoimmune reactions,
due to binding of nuclear antibodies [37]. Insufficiency of

Advances in Dermatology and Allergology 4, August / 2018

CRP may also promote development of lupus erythema‘ous [36]. This phenomenon can be an explanation for
he decreased level of CRP in a group of patients with
autoimmune comparing to AU. The biggest difference
in CRP concentration was observed in acute vs. chronic
autoimmune urticaria (statistically significant difference).
Piconi et al. proved that production of proinflammatory
cytokines such as TNF-a is higher in the group of patients
with CSU presenting a negative autologous serum skin
est, than in patients with autoimmune urticaria (posiive ASST) in whom intensity of the inflammatory process
is much more lower [40]. This is in agreement with our
observations and may be caused by the presence of the
ypothetical factor inhibiting production of cytokines by
ripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) [40].
Patterns of APR biomarkers in the serum of patients
suffering from acute and CSU were similar in the analyzed material. However AU was characterized by the
ighest serum concentration of CRP comparing to other
ypes of urticaria. Acute urticaria is mainly IgE mediated
and histamine influences the secretion of many different
cytokines engaged in development and maintenance of
inflammation [16]. Lin et al. suggested that the increased
concentration of CRP as well as other proinflammatory
cytokines may be characteristic of the late phase of type
hypersensitivity reaction [38].
We only observed statistically hig!
rations of AGP-RC while analyzing the whole group of
patients with urticaria regardless of the type of the disease in comparison to healthy volunteers. There were no
statistically significant differences in serum concentraions of APP reactivity coefficients while analyzing the
articular types of urticaria separately. In turn, a statistically higher serum concentration of AGP comparing to
he control group was detected in patients with AU and
CSU. The serum concentration of AGP was also statisically higher in AU than in CINDU. a,-acid glycoprotein
as multifactorial effects on the immunological system
inhibiting activity of many cells such as neutrophils,
monocytes or macrophages thus suppressing the inflammation.
Analysis of differences in serum concentrations of
APR biomarkers and selected clinical features revealed
higher levels of CRP in the group of patients suffering
from AU associated with angioedema than in the group
of patients without angioedema. Lin et al. observed
a negative correlation between serum concentrations of
CRP and histamine in IgE-mediated reactions [39]. There
were also statistically lower serum concentrations of ACT,
Cp and Hp in patients with AU with angioedema comparing to patients without angioedema. To conclude, the
changes in circulating APP are dependent on the extension of the local inflammatory response but demonstrate
no relation to the causative factor. In urticaria associated
with angioedema where inflammatory reactions are localized within a deeper layer of the skin and/or subcuta
 

 

er serum concen
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

405
M. Czarnecka-Operacz, J. Szulczyfska-Gabor, K. Lesniewska, E. Teresiak-Mikotajczak, P. Bartkiewicz, D. Jenerowicz,

K. Wiktorowicz, Z. Adamski

 

neous tissues, the serum concentrations of selected APP
are lower than in patients with the disease of a milder
course (without angioedema). This is probably due to
the fact that certain APP suppress the inflammatory reactions thus their deficiency may promote development
of a wider spectrum of clinical symptoms.

It has been proved that serum concentrations of
certain APP such as CRP and IL-6 are higher in severe
CU than in patients presenting milder symptoms of the
disease [7, 20]. We also observed positive correlations
between serum concentrations of the most studied APP
and disease activity measured with TSS. Higher serum
levels of CRP, AGP, ACT, Cp and Hp were characteristic of
the patients with a more severe course of the urticaria
(higher TSS). Patients with a higher serum level of aforementioned APR biomarkers presented more intense itch,
a higher number and size of urticarial wheals. Similarly,
in the group of patients with the acute type of urticaria,
a more severe course of the disease was associated with
increased serum levels of CRP, ACT and Cp as well as decreased levels of RC-AGR C-reactive protein acts as a potent activator of the complement cascade and coagulation/fibrinolysis processes. Its elevated level contributes
to a significant increase in the cardiovascular risk and
may induce or enhance inflammatory response [41].

We also observed that patients with AU presented
a more prolonged disease course and had statistically
a higher serum concentration of Tf, a,M and AT. There
was also a positive correlation between duration of the
symptoms and the serum level of Tf, aM and AT in the
group of patients suffering from AU. This leads to a conclusion that both activity and duration of the disease
depend on the intensity of inflammatory processes and
they are expressed by a specific pattern of APR biomarkers. Urticaria is usually a long-term disease characterized
by an unpredictable course. Therefore, it is important to
define the prognostic factors that allow to predict the
duration and severity of the disease. The results of this
study point to some APP such as Tf, a,M, AT or ACT as
good biomarkers of urticaria severity [19].

Until now, elevated serum concentrations of APP
ave been described in patients suffering from sponaneous CU, AU and delayed pressure urticaria [18-20].
esults of our study revealed increased concentrations
of APP also in autoimmune (CRP, Tf) and inducible (CRP,
Hp) types of urticaria. Collected data proved that acute
and certain types of CU present specific changes in APP
serum concentrations and their glycosylation profiles.
Whether the increase of circulating APR biomarkers is
only an epiphenomenon or are they actually engaged in
athogenesis of urticaria and enhance the inflammation,
still requires further studies. However, characterization of
a specific profile of APP provides information about the
ype and activity of the disease. A significant correlation
observed between CRP, AGP, ACT, Cp, Hp and clinical acivity score of urticaria (TSS) points to the potential role

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

406

of APP as markers of the urticarial activity. Estimation of
APR biomarkers serum levels may be a useful tool in diagnosing and monitoring activity and response to treatment of urticaria.

Despite the limitations of the study such as disproportion between the study and the control group, some
conclusions may be drawn with caution. A significant
correlation observed between the acute-phase proteins
concentration in the serum and clinical activity score of
urticaria points to the potential role of these proteins
as markers of the disease activity. Estimation of acute
phase reaction biomarkers levels in the serum may serve
as a useful tool in diagnosing and monitoring the activity
of urticaria and its response to treatment.

 

Conflict of interest

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References

. Zuberbier T, Aberer W, Asero R, et al. The EAACI/GA(2) LEN/
EDF/WAO Guideline for the definition, classification, diagnosis, and management of urticaria: the 2013 revision and
update. Allergy 2014; 69: 868-87.

. Kaplan A. Inflammation in chronic urticaria is not limited to
the consequences of mast cell (or basophil) degranulation.
Clin Exp Allergy 2010; 40: 834-5.

. Streetz KL, Wiistefeld T, Klein C, et al. Mediators of inflammation and acute phase response in the liver. Cell Mol Biol
2001; 47: 661-73.

4. Moshage H. Cytokines and the hepatic acute phase response. J Pathol 1997; 181: 257-66.

. Baumann H, Gauldie J. The acute phase response. Immunol
Today 1994; 15: 74-80.

6. Fux M, Pecaric-Petkovic T, Odermatt A, et al. IL-33 is a me
diator rather than a trigger of the acute allergic response in

humans. Allergy 2014; 69: 216-22.

Kasperska-Zajac A. Acute-phase response in chronic urti
caria. JEADV 2012; 26: 665-72.

Grzanka A, Machura E, Misiolek M, et al. Systemic inflamma
tory response and calcification markers in patients with long

lasting moderate-severe chronic spontaneous urticaria. Eur

J Dermatol 2015; 25: 26-8.

|. Sabroe RA, Grattan CE, Francis DM, et al. The autologous serum skin test: a screening test for autoantibodies in chronic
idiopathic urticaria. Br ) Dermatol 1999; 140: 446-52.

10. Lorette G, Giannetti A, Pereira RS, et al. One-year treatment
of chronic urticaria with mizolastine: efficacy and safety.
URTOL study group. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 2000; 14:
83-90.

11. Lialikau SA, Haurylik LL, Sobieska M, et al. Acute phase proteins serum concentrations in children are related to urinary
iodine excretion. Rocz Akad Med Bialymst 2005; 50: 279-83.

12. Wedi B, Wieczorek D, Raap U, et al. Urticaria. ] Dtsch Dermatol Ges 2014; 12: 997-1007.

13. Zuberbier T, Henz BM, Fiebiger E, et al. Anti-Fcepsilon RI alpha serum autoantibodies in different subtypes of urticaria.
Allergy 2000; 55: 951-4.

14. Kruger-Krasagakes S, Moller A, Kolde G, et al. Production

of interleukin-6 by human mast cells and basophilic cells.

J Invest Dermatol 1996; 106: 75-9.

Be

N

w

w

wy.

=

oO

Advances in Dermatology and Allergology 4, August / 2018
Acute-phase response and its biomarkers in acute and chronic urticaria

 

15.

16

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31,

32.

33:

34.

Caproni M, Giomi B, Volpi W, et al. Chronic idiopathic urticaria: infiltrating cells and related cytokines in autologous
serum-induced wheals. Clin Immunol 2005; 114: 284-92.

. Marone G, Granata F, Spadaro G, et al. The histamine-cyto
kine network in allergic inflammation. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2003; 112 (4 Suppl): $83-8.

Kasperska-Zajac A, Grzanka A, Machura E, et al. Analysis of
procalcitonin and CRP concentrations in serum of patients
with chronic spontaneous urticaria. Inflamm Res 2013; 62:
309-12.
Kasperska-Zajac A, Jasinska T, Grzanka A, et al. Markers of
systemic inflammation in delayed pressure urticaria. Int
J Dermatol 2013; 52: 309-10.

Kasperska-Zajac A, Grzanka A, Czecior E, et al. Acute phase
inflammatory markers in patients with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) — induced acute urticaria/angioedema and after aspirin challange. JEADV 2012; 27: 1048-52.
Kasperska-Zajac A, Sztylc J, Machura E, et al. Plasma IL-6
concentration correlates with clinical disease activity and
serum C-reactive protein concentration in chronic urticaria
patients. Clin Exp Allergy 2011; 41: 1386-91.

Henz BM, Maurer M, Lippert U, et al. Mast cells as initiators
of immunity and host defense. Exp Dermatol 2001; 10: 1-10.
Dietze SC, Sommerhoff CP, Fritz H. Inhibition of histamine
release from human mast cells ex vivo by natural and synthetic chymase inhibitors. Biol Chem Hoppe Seyler 1990; 371
Suppl: 75-9.

Hultsch T, Ennis M, Heidtmann HH. The effect of serine esterase inhibitors on ionophore-induced histamine release
from human pulmonary mast cells. Agents Actions 1988; 23:
198-200.

Yanagida M, Fukamachi H, Takei M, et al. Effect of a chymotrypsin-like inhibitor, TPCK, on histamine release from
cultured human mast cells. J Pharm Pharmacol 1997; 49:
537-41.

Kantorski J, Tchorzewski H. The effect of serine and thiol
protease inhibitors on the chemiluminescence of human
neutrophils in investigations in vitro. J Biolumin Chemilumin 1992; 7: 37-45.

Tchorzewski H, Fornalczyk E, Pasnik J. Protease inhibitors diminish lymphocyte stimulation in vitro. Immunol Lett 1995;
46: 237-40.

Vidard L, Rock KL, Benacerraf B. Diversity in MHC class II
ovalbumin T cell epitopes generated by distinct proteases.
J Immunol 1992; 149: 498-504.

He SH, Chen P, Chen HQ. Modulation of enzymatic activity of
human mast cell tryptase and chymase by protease inhibitors. Acta Pharmacol Sin 2003; 24: 923-9.

Lindmark B, Wallengren J. Heterozygous alpha 1-antichymotrypsin deficiency may be associated with cold urticaria.
Allergy 1992; 47: 456-8.

Doeglas HM, Bleumink E. Protease inhibitors in plasma of
patients with chronic urticaria. Arch Dermatol 1975; 111:
979-85.

Doeglas HM, Klasen EC, Bleumink E. Alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency and Pl typing in patients with chronic urticaria. Br
J Dermatol 1985; 112: 381-5.

Imai S. Serum alpha 1-protease inhibitor levels in patients
with chronic idiopathic urticaria. Acta Derm Venereol 1993;
73: 10-1.

Eftekhari N, Ward AM, Allen R, et al. Protease inhibitor profiles
in urticaria and angio-oedema. Br J Dermatol 1980; 103: 33-9.
Chodirker WB, Bauman W, Komar RR. Immunological parameters and alpha 1-antitrypsinin chronic urticaria. Clin Allergy
1979; 9: 201-10.

 

Advances in Dermatology and Allergology 4, August / 2018

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

. Li P, Gao XH, Chen HD, et al. Localization of haptoglobin in

normal human skin and some skin diseases. Int ) Dermatol
2005; 44: 280-4.

Black S, Kushner |, Samols D. C-reactive protein. J Biol Chem
2004; 279: 48487-90.

Du Clos TW. C-reactive protein as a regulator of autoimmunity and inflammation. Arthritis Rneum 2003; 48: 1475-7.
Lin RY. Elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) levels in patients
with recurrent urticaria and/or angioedema. Internet J Asthma Allergy Immunol 2002; 15320642: 2(1).

Lin RY, Trivino MR, Curry A, et al. Interleukin 6 and C-reactive
protein levels in patients with acute allergic reactions: an
emergency department-based study. Ann Allergy Asthma
Immunol 2001; 87: 412-6.

Piconi S, Trabattoni D, lemoli E, et al. Immune profiles of
patients with chronic idiopathic urticaria. Int Arch Allergy
Immunol 2002; 128: 59-66.

Nettis E, Pannofino A, D’Aprile C, et al. Clinical and aetiological aspects in urticaria and angio-oedema. Br J Dermatol
2003; 148: 501-6.

407
