An observational study on the efficacy of single injection of Omalizumab in the treatment of

Chronic Spontaneous Urticaria

Dr Sandeep Lal V- MD, DNB ; Consultant, Department of Dermatology, Governmnet Victoria
(women & child) Hospital, Kollam,Kerala, India.

sandeeplalv@gmail.com

Dr Sandeep Arora - MD; Professor & HoD, Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Leprosy,
Command Hospital Air Force Bangalore, India.

aroraderma@gmail.com

Or Rajeshwari Dabas — MD; Associate Professor, Department of Dermatology, Venereology and
.eprosy, Command Hospital Air Force Bangalore, India

ajay 13dabas@gmail.com

Dr Manasa Shettisara Janney- MD, DNB; Consultant, Department of Dermatology, Military
Hospital, Dimapur, Nagaland, India

manasajanne@gmail.com

Dr Sushma J B— MD; Consultant, Department of Dermatology Siddaganga Hospital Research
Centre, Tumkur, Karnataka, India.

drsushma.j.b@gmail.com

Dr Niyor M Das — MD; Consultant, Department of Dermatology, Base Hospital, Tezpur, Assam,
india.

das.niyor83@gmail.com

Abstract word count: 249

Text word count: 1897

Number of references: 12

Number of table: 2

Number of figure: |

Conflict of interest: None

Running title: Omalizumab in urticaria

 

This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but has not been through
the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process which may lead to differences
between this version and the Version of Record. Please cite this article as doi: 10.1111/dth.14397

 

 

 

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Check for
updates
Sources of support if any: None

Author Contribution:

Sandeep Lal V: Conceptualization, Investigation, Data curation, Writing-original draft
Sandeep Arora: Investigation, Writing-review & editing

Rajeshwari Dabbas: Supervision, Writing-review & editing

Manasa Shettisara Janney: Investigation, Data curation, Writing-original draft
Dr Sushma J B: Supervision, Writing-review & editing

Niyor M Das: Supervision, Writing-review & editing
Disclaimer: “We confirm that the manuscript has been read and approved by all the authors, that the
requirements for authorship as stated earlier in this document have been met and that each author

elieves that the manuscript represents honest work”

Data availability statement: The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author upon reasonable request.

Corresponding author:

Name: Sandeep Lal V

Address: Shangrila, Bodhi Nagar 131, Thattamala PO, Kollam, Kerala. India
Pin: 691020

Phone numbers: +919483998640

E-mail address: sandeeplalv@gmail.com

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Abstract

Background: Chronic Spontaneous Urticaria (CSU) is one of the most challenging therapeutic
problems faced by dermatologists. Omalizumab is a third line drug for CSU which is currently
recommended as monthly injections for six months.

Aim: To study the efficacy of single injection of Omalizumab in the treatment of CSU.

Methods: This was a prospective single center observational study. Single dose of injection
Omalizumab 300mg was administered to 30 patients of CSU on double the dose of tablet Fexofenadine
180mg with Urticaria Activity Score (UAS 7) more than 15 and their response was assessed using UAS7 up to 6 months. The mean duration of response of early and late responders were analysed.

Results: Of the 30 patients who completed the study, 29 patients (96.7%) were responders and 1(3.3%)
was non-responder. Of the 29 responders, 21(70%) were early responders and 8(26.7%) late responders.
The mean total symptom free durations amongst early and late responders were analysed and were found
significant.
Conclusion:. The prolonged symptom free intervals in early responders after single injection of
Omalizumab followed by antihistamines not only prevented over treatment with Omalizumab but was
also cost saving in the long-term management of these cases. With careful monitoring of UAS7 scores
>» ndividualized, cost-effective approach can be adopted in the treatment of CSU. This study provides
: basis for larger studies and may eventually determine a new standard of care with respect to limiting
he doses of a biologic.
Keywords: Omalizumab, Chronic Spontaneous Urticaria, Urticaria Activity Score (UAS), Anti-IgE

antibody

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Introduction
The earliest description of urticaria is found in "The Yellow Emperor's Inner Classic", written by Huang
Di Nei Jing, between 1000-200 BC meaning wind-type concealed rash. CSU is characterised by
occurrence of wheals, angioedema or both for more than 6 months in the absence of a trigger and have
an incidence of 0.5% - 1% in general population with an average duration varying from 1-Syears.""] CSU
patients have a poor health status and subjective well-being affecting their quality of life. Various
reatment modalities like antihistamines, steroids, dapsone, sulfasalazine, hydroxychloroquine, tricyclic
antidepressants, immunosuppressive treatments in the form of intravenous immunoglobulins, rituximab,
methotrexate and mycophenolate mofetil have been tried”).
Present treatment guidelines recommend Omalizumab as a third line add on drug to the four fold dose
of modern second generation anti-histamines!”!, The sedative potential is the main limiting factor in up
dosing up to four times the dose of antihistamines which is not generally tolerated by patients. Of the
sommonly used antihistamines Fexofenadine is the drug with the best sedation vs benefit ratio!!.
Omalizumab is a humanised anti IgE monoclonal antibody which acts by binding to the free IgE
antibodies. It also has an indirect effect by the downregulation of FceRI receptors. Present guidelines
recommend monthly injections of 300mg Omalizumab for six months in refractory cases of CSU not
“eeonding to second generation anti histamines.'*! Data on efficacy of single injection of Omalizumab
s scant.! If found effective in reducing the UAS-7 scores, there would be a tremendous cost saving in

siving this expensive monoclonal antibody only once in six months.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Methods

This prospective single center observational study was carried out after obtaining institutional ethical
committee clearance, amongst patients above 12 years of age diagnosed as a case of CSU and who were
symptomatic with moderate to severe urticaria (UAS-7 >15) even after two doses of Fexofenadine
180mg in a day. Pregnant and lactating women, patients with inducible urticaria, internal malignancy,
‘mmunocompromised, those previously treated with Omalizumab and patients who were unwilling to

comply with the study guidelines and follow up were excluded.

All treatment modalities of CSU other than tablet Fexofenadine were stopped one month before
administering injection Omalizumab. Initial UAS-7 score was recorded. The patients were administered
a single dose of injection Omalizumab 300mg subcutaneously and tablet Fexofenadine was continued
till the patients were either urticaria free or well controlled (UAS7 0-6) and thereafter stopped. The
patients were followed up for a period of six months. Those patients who became symptomatic during
follow up were prescribed up to double the dose of tablet Fexofenadine and were observed till they
became moderately symptomatic (UAS-7 >15). Patients who at any time after the first four weeks of
injection Omalizumab became moderately symptomatic even on double the dose of tablet Fexofenadine
180mg were prescribed another dose of injection Omalizumab and were excluded from further study.
Patients filled up the patient self-evaluation sheet and UAS-7 scores were calculated as per the
evaluation sheet maintained by patient at serial intervals.

The response to treatment was assessed at fixed intervals during therapy and patients were classified as
.) Responders — all patients who showed reduction in UAS -7 score at 4 weeks of injection.

11) Early responders - responders with more than 20% reduction in UAS — 7 score from baseline within

eight days of injection

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
iii) Late responders - responders with less than 20% reduction in UAS — 7 score from baseline after 8
days of injection

iv) Non-responders - patients with no reduction in UAS -7 scores at 4 weeks of therapy.

v) Complete response — Patient is asymptomatic with single dose of Omalizumab alone.

vi) Partial response — Patient requires tablet Fexofenadine in addition to single dose of Omalizumab to
be asymptomatic.

UAS7 were assessed based on the patient self-evaluation sheet at initiation of therapy, 01 week, 02
weeks, 03 weeks, 04 weeks, 08 weeks, 12 weeks, 16 weeks and 24 weeks. (Fig I Strobe Statement)
Statistical analysis

The mean duration for initial response, duration for complete response and total duration symptom free
or mildly symptomatic with fexofenadine were compared between early responders and late responders

and their statistical significance were analysed using ‘independent samples student T test’.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Results

A total 162 patients were assessed for the study over a period of 18 months of which 125 patients

were excluded based on exclusion criteria and 7 were lost to follow-up. 30 patients completed the study.
Of the 30 patients, 29 patients (96.7%) were responders and | patient (3.3%) was non-responder (Fig
'). Of the 29 responders, 21 (70%) were early responders and 8 (26.7%) were late responders. The
slinico-demographic characteristics of the study population is as per (Table I). There was no correlation
with the age, sex and duration of disease with the severity and response to treatment. 7 patients were
round to have hypothyroidism of which 6 were late responders and 1 was non responder. 5 patients had
Anti TPO positivity of which 2 were early responders, 2 were late responders and 1 was non responder.
The patients had taken various treatments for chronic urticaria including anti-histamines, mast cell
stabilizers, varying courses of steroids, Dapsone, Cyclosporine and Methotrexate. The average UAS7 scores were 33.5 (sd 3.36), 36, 33 (sd 3.43) and 34.5 (sd 3.2) that of study population, non-responders,
early responders and late responders respectively.

Three patients were excluded from the study at one month after administration of injection as
they attained UAS7 >15 even on double the dose of Tab Fexofenadine 180mg on follow up. Only four
(13.3%) patients remained asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic for a duration of six months after a
single dose of injection Omalizumab.

The mean duration of initial response of early and late responders were analysed and was found to be
significant. All 21 early responders attained complete response while amongst the late responders only
)» attained complete response. The period to achieve complete response of early and later responders

vere analysed and found significant. The mean total durations symptom free or mildly symptomatic

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
with anti-histamines amongst early and late responders were analysed and were found to be significant.

(Table ID). No adverse effects were noted in the study population.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Discussion

CSU is a common disease that is particularly difficult to treat and in severe cases the impact it
has on the health related quality of life is comparable to that of a coronary artery disease patients.!°!

Omalizumab is an anti IgE antibody approved as a third line drug for treatment of CSU. There
s no specific guideline for the use of Omalizumab in CSU, though most recommendations suggest the
idministration of Omalizumab every four weeks for six months. Serum IgE levels in urticaria and

esponse to Omalizumab was not found to be variable in earlier studies and so was not assessed in the
present study!”),

The present study assessed the efficacy of single dose of injection Omalizumab in treatment of
CSU and followed upto a period of six months. A total of 162 patients were assessed of which 30 patients
completed the study. Zuber et. al. in their study on epidemiology of urticaria found out that lifetime
prevalence for CSU was 1.8%, and 70.3% of the subjects were female.!*! This study population
comprised of 11 (36.66%) females and 19 (63.33%) males. All though urticaria occurs in all age groups,
the peak incidence has been noted in age group between 20-40 years as noted by Zuber et. al. and others.
[8] The average age of the study population was 36.83 (sd 11.98) years with the majority falling between
18-40 years of age which is similar to other studies.

The average duration of CSU varies from 1-5 years in various studies. !18°! The average duration
of disease was 28.93 (sd 38.94) months amongst the study population which was in concordance with
-he other studies.

The prevalence of positive thyroid autoantibodies ranged from 12 to 29% in patients with CSU
n different studies.!!°! Prevalence of antithyroid antibodies in the present study was 16% and was

equally found in early and late responders. The early responders with antithyroid antibodies were

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
euthyroid. Seven of the thirty (23%) patients had raised TSH values. A study by Sanchez et al found out
an increased incidence of Anti TPO IgE antibodies in CSU patients and IgG Anti TPO antibodies in
other autoimmune thyroid disorders.!'"! The presence of IgE Anti TPO antibodies could be the reason
for early response in two patients despite antibody positivity though detailed analysis of type of
antibodies were not studied.

In a study from India which has observed four patients of CSU treated with a single injection of
Omalizumab and observed for a duration of 24 weeks revealed a sharp decline in UAS7 in 7—10 days
which was maintained up to 16 weeks in one case and 20 weeks in the other three cases.!°!

In the present study of the 30 patients 29 were responders while one did not show any
‘mprovement in urticaria symptoms at the end of four weeks. Of the 29 responders 21 were early
sesponders and eight were late responders.

The response of early responders was compared with that of late responders. The mean durations
‘or initial response, complete response, symptom free intervals with and without anti-histamines, and
mild symptomatic period with anti-histamines and total symptom free duration of the two groups were
analysed and were found to be significant. (t value <0.05). No adverse effects were noted in the study
population. These observations are in concordance with the only study which has observed the patients
94 weeks after single injection of Omalizumab.!!

n this study it has been observed that the response rate and duration of response to Omalizumab has
yeen better than other studies!'?!, Most of the patients who responded early had a longer duration of
“emission of symptoms. The late responders either were not completely asymptomatic or had shorter
asymptomatic periods. Moreover, they had early recurrence of symptoms and less response to anti
histamines.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
The mechanism of action of Omalizumab in urticaria is not completely understood. Omalizumab
acts by binding to the free IgE antibodies with an indirect effect by the downregulation of FceRI receptor
density on basophils and cutaneous mast cells, preventing activation by autoantibodies. This down
regulation of receptors may be the reason for the late response of Omalizumab. The late response has
been observed as late as 26 days from the date of administration of the drug. Omalizumab also stabilizes
the mast cells and reduces the sensitivity of mast cells to antigens. It also worth noting that Omalizumab

herapy is a symptomatic treatment, and symptoms almost invariably recur when therapy is stopped.

Based on the above observations we recommend that administration of injection Omalizumab
should be individualized to suit the needs of the patient. Early responders were found to have a longer

luration of symptom free response ranging up to 6 months and hence its recommended that instead of
administering Omalizumab every 4 weeks, it can be administered on ‘requirement’ basis. The prolonged
symptom free intervals in early responders after single injection followed by antihistamines not only
orevented over treatment with Omalizumab but also was cost saving in the long-term management of
these cases. With careful monitoring of UAS7 scores an individualized, cost-effective approach can be
adopted in the treatment of CSU with Omalizumab. This study provides a basis for larger studies and

may eventually determine a new standard of care with respect to limiting the doses of a biologic.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
References

6.

10.

A2,

Weller K, Altrichter S, Ardelean E, et a/. Chronic urticaria. Prevalence, course, prognostic factors
and impact. Hautarzt 2010;61:750-7.

Zuberbier T, Aberer W, Asero R, et al. The EAACI/GA7LEN/EDF/WAO guideline for the
definition, classification, diagnosis and management of urticaria. Allergy 2018;73:1393-414.

Church M, Church D. Pharmacology of antihistamines. Indian J Dermatol 2013;58:219.

Godse K, Rajagopalan M, Girdhar M, et al. Position statement for the use of omalizumab in the
management of chronic spontaneous urticaria in Indian patients. Indian Dermatol Online J 2016;7:6.

Subramaniyan R, Chopra A. Treatment of chronic spontaneous urticaria with a single dose of
omalizumab: A study of four cases. Indian J Dermatol 2016;61:467.

O’Donnell BF, Lawlor F, Simpson J, Morgan M, Greaves MW. The impact of chronic urticaria on
the quality of life. Br J Dermatol 1997;136:197—201.

Uysal P, Eller E, Mortz CG, Bindslev-Jensen C. An algorithm for treating chronic urticaria with
omalizumab: Dose interval should be individualized. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;133:914-915.e2.

Zuberbier T, Balke M, Worm M, Edenharter G, Maurer M. Epidemiology of urticaria: a
representative cross-sectional population survey: Epidemiology of urticaria: a representative crosssectional population survey. Clin Exp Dermatol 2010;35:869-73.

Khan S, Maitra A, Hissaria P, et al. Chronic Urticaria: Indian Context—Challenges and Treatment
Options. Dermatol Res Pract 2013;2013:1-8.

Confino-Cohen R, Chodick G, Shalev V, Leshno M, Kimhi O, Goldberg A. Chronic urticaria and
autoimmunity: Associations found in a large population study. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2012;129:1307-13.

il, Sanchez J, Sanchez A, Cardona R. Causal Relationship Between Anti-TPO IgE and Chronic

Urticaria by Jn Vitro and In Vivo Tests. Allergy Asthma Immunol Res 2019;11:29.
Tonacci A, Billeci L, Pioggia G, Navarra M, Gangemi S. Omalizumab for the Treatment of Chronic

Idiopathic Urticaria: Systematic Review of the Literature. Pharmacother J Hum Pharmacol Drug
Ther 2017;37:464—80.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Tables:

Table I : Demographic profile

Average Age
years (SD*) 36.83 (11.98) 38.28 (11.18) B52 (1371)
Male 19 (63.33) 8 (38.1) 5 (62,5) 1
Female 11 (36.66) 13 (61.9) 3 (37.5) Nil

Duration of
disease, 28.93 (38.94) 29.61 (43.56) 27.75 (31.08) 24
months (SD*)

UAS -7 Average

(SD*) 33.5 (3.36) 33 (3.43) 34.5 (3.2) 36

Angio-oedema 1 (3.3) 1 (4.76) Nil Nil
Hypothyroidism 7 0 6 1
Anti TPO 5 2 2 1

*SD: Standard deviation

Table II: Study response amongst various groups

Initial response 7.55 735 4.14 16.5 0.000
(days) (6.25) (6.25) (1.19) (5.09)
Complete 12.63 12.04 (9.67) 8.23 21 0.001
response (days) (9.66) (3.36) (14.89)
Total duration 117.46 121.51 138.61 41.62 0.000
symptom free or (65.32) (62.74) (55.27) (36.94)
mildly

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
symptomatic on
antihistamines

Figures:
Fig 1: Strobe Statement

 

Assessed for study = 162

Included = 125

Omalizumab 300mg s/c Lost to follow wy

 

 

 

 

30 (Observation for 24 weeks)

 

 

Responders = 29 | | Non-Responder = 1 (Eliminated) |

 

     
       

 

Late Responder = 8

| Early Responders = 21 |

Complete Responder = 21 | Complete Responders = 6 |

 

 

Partial Responder = 2

 

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
