Rostrum

 

How to Treat Patients with Chronic Spontaneous
Urticaria with Omalizumab: Questions and Answers

 

Murat Tiirk, MD°, Leonor Carneiro-Ledo, MD”, Pavel Kolkhir, MD*“, Hanna Bonnekoh, MD°, Thomas Buttgereit, MD°, and

Marcus Maurer, MD°

Omalizumab is an effective treatment for patients with chronic
spontaneous urticaria (CSU). In routine clinical practice,
physicians often face complex cases of CSU and need to decide
whether patients are suitable for omalizumab treatment and how
to manage this therapy. Here, we provide evidence and
experience-based answers to the most common and important
questions on omalizumab treatment of CSU. At 4 large urticaria
centers, questions on the use of omalizumab in the treatment of
patients with CSU were collected and then ranked by frequency
and importance and grouped into top 5 domains using an
interactive consensus approach. We suggest that omalizumab
can be used to treat patients with CSU with any of the 3 CSU
phenotypes (wheals only, angioedema only, wheals and
angioedema), with comorbid chronic inducible urticaria, with
cancer, who receive other biologics or cyclosporine, or who are
pregnant or want to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding.
Omalizumab treatment should be started with 300 mg every 4
weeks, monitored with validated patient-reported outcome
measures, and maintained, in responders, until remission of
CSU. Finally, partial responders or non responders can benefit
from omalizumab updosing or adding or switching to
cyclosporine. We believe our suggestions on the use of
omalizumab in CSU will help to inform clinical decision
making. Follow-up efforts should increase, systematically review,
and profile the data available and provide evidence-based

recommendations on how to best use omalizumab in

“Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Erciyes University School of
Medicine, Kayseri, Turkey

Allergy and Clinical Immunology Department, Centro Hospitalar Universitario de
Sio Joao, E.P.E., Oporto, Portugal

‘Dermatological Allergology, Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Charité —
Universititsmedizin Berlin, Corporate member of Freie Universitit Berlin,
Humboldt-Universitit zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany

“Division of Immune-mediated Skin Diseases, Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russia

P.K. was supported by the “Russian Academic Excellence Project 5-100" and a
GA’LEN stipend.

Conflicts of interest: M. Tiirk has received travel grants from Novartis. P. Kolkhir
has served as a speaker for Novartis. M. Maurer is a consultant/speaker for and
recipient of research funds made available to his institution by Novartis and
Genentech. The rest of the authors declare that they have no relevant conflicts of
interest.

Received for publication May 20, 2019; revised June 29, 2019; accepted for publication July 12, 2019.

Available online ll

Corresponding author: Marcus Maurer, MD, Department of Dermatology and
Allergy, Charité — Universitiitsmedizin Berlin, Charitéplatz 1, Berlin 10117,
Germany. E-mail: marcus.maurer@charite.de.

2213-2198

© 2019 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaip.2019.07.021

 

 

Kayseri, Turkey; Oporto, Portugal; Berlin, Germany; and Moscow, Russia

CSU. © 2019 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma &

Immunology (J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 2019;m )

Key words: Chronic spontaneous urticaria; Wheals; Angioe
 

dema; Treatment; Omalizumab; Disease response

INTRODUCTION

Chronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU) is a heterogeneous disease characterized by the development of transient (usually <24
hours) pruritic wheals, angioedema, or both, which are not
related to specific triggers, for longer than 6 weeks. CSU causes
severe impairment in patients’ quality of life (QOL).'* The
international guideline on CSU recommends to “treat CSU until
it is gone.” It also recommends using pharmacotherapy “as much
as needed and as little as possible,” to first move patients to
effective treatment and to then establish long-term therapy with
an optimal risk/benefit profile.’

The use of a second-generation antihistamine (sgAH) at the
licensed dose is recommended as the first-line treatment of CSU,
and updosing of this sgAH up to 4-fold is recommended in
treatment-resistant patients.” In antihistamine-resistant patients,
the humanized anti-lgE mAb omalizumab is recommended as
the only third-line treatment option.’

The clinical efficacy and safety of omalizumab in CSU has
been shown in several clinical trials and real-life studies, ~'” and
multiple mechanisms have been suggested for the therapeutic
effects of omalizumab in CSU.'*''* Several recent studies have
helped to understand how and why patients with CSU respond
when treated with omalizumab (complete, partial, or no
response; fast vs slow response), with important insights on

 

relevant mechanisms and potential predictors of treatment
outcome.'”!” However, many questions on how to use omalizumab in CSU remain unanswered. Here, we review the most
frequent and important questions on the use of omalizumab in
CSU grouped into 5 domains, and we provide, on the basis of
available evidence and our experience, suggestions (Table I) and a
practical approach (Figure 1) for answers and solutions.

METHODS

At 4 large urticaria centers in Germany, Turkey, Russia, and
Portugal, questions encountered on the use of omalizumab in the
treatment of patients with CSU were collected and grouped by
domains, which were then ranked by frequency and importance
using an interactive consensus approach. For the top 5 domains of
questions, we first performed a PubMed and Google Scholar search
to identify the most recent relevant studies. We then selected and

reviewed studies that provide applicable information for our selected

 

questions. Finally, we used the evidence from these studies together
2 TURK ETAL

Abbreviations used
AAS- Angioedema activity score
ClIndU- Chronic inducible urticaria
CSU- Chronic spontaneous urticaria

QOL- Quality of life

RCT- Randomized controlled trial
SD- Symptomatic dermographism
sgAH- Second-generation antihistamine
UAS7- Urticaria activity score for 7 consecutive days
UCT- Urticaria control test

 

with our clinical experience for the development of suggestions for
answers and solutions, using a consensus-based approach.

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
Domain 1: Which patients with CSU should be
considered for omalizumab treatment?

What do we know? Omalizumab is licensed for the treatment
of patients with CSU and recommended by the international
urticaria guideline for patients with CSU unresponsive to antihistamine treatment.’ What do we need to know? Can all patients with CSU be treated with omalizumab? Can omalizumab
be expected to be safe and well tolerated in all patients with CSU
and can all patients with CSU be expected to benefit?

In the phase III trials and all other randomized controlled
trials (RCTs) on omalizumab performed so far, the presence of
wheals was an inclusion criterion, thus excluding patients with
CSU with exclusively angioedema. Along the same line, the
exclusion criteria of many RCTs included “a clearly defined
underlying cause of chronic urticaria, e.g. physical urticaria,” thus
excluding patients with CSU with comorbid inducible urticaria
(CIndU). CIndU is known to be a risk factor for severe CSU.
Finally, malignant diseases and treatment with cyclosporine or
other biologics, pregnancy, or breast-feeding were exclusion
criteria in most controlled trials of omalizumab in CSU, and
children younger than 12 years were also excluded. Is there
enough evidence and experience to recommend the use of
omalizumab in these patient populations with CSU?

 

 

Should omalizumab be used in all 3 CSU phenotypes—wheals and angioedema, wheals but no
angioedema, and angioedema but no wheals? Three
CSU phenotypes have been described: (1) 33% to 67% of patients with CSU experience wheals and angioedema, (2) 29% to
65% of patients with CSU exhibit wheals but no angioedema,
and (3) up to 13% of patients with CSU have angioedema but
no wheals.'® Although there is strong evidence of efficacy of
omalizumab in patients with CSU who have wheals, with or
without angioedema, no controlled trials have been performed in
patients with CSU with angioedema but without wheals.
However, the use of omalizumab for the treatment of angioedema in patients with CSU is supported by the results from
controlled studies involving patients who had angioedema and
wheals, as well as case reports of patients with angioedema but no
wheals.

Analyses of the pooled data from 3 omalizumab phase III trials
revealed that treatment with 300 mg/4 wk of omalizumab led to
a marked reduction in days per week with angioedema as

J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL PRACT
MONTH 2019

compared with placebo at 12 and 24 weeks.'” Among patients
with baseline angioedema, those treated with 300 mg had a
greater clinical benefit (defined by the improvement in the QOL
and frequency of angioedema episodes) as compared with the
omalizumab 150-mg and, especially, 75-mg groups.”

The double-blind RCT X-ACT included only those patients
with CSU who had 4 or more angioedema episodes during the 6
months before inclusion.*”*! Treatment with 300 mg of omalizumab significantly decreased the angioedema activity as
assessed by the angioedema activity score (AAS), number
of angioedema-burdened days per week, the frequency and size
of angioedema, and the median time to the first recurrence of
angioedema. Furthermore, patients treated with 300 mg omalizumab had significant improvement in QO. C= Finally,
omalizumab treatment decreased depression scores and fear of
suffocation due to angioedema.”

In several case reports and case series, omalizumab was successfully used in a total of 28 patients with angioedema but no
wheals (Table II). In most patients, 300 mg/4 wk was used, and
the onset of effect was seen during the week after the first in
 

jection. In all patients, angioedema ceased to occur while on
omalizumab treatment, and corticosteroids were stopped in
patients who had received them (Table II). In the largest case
series reported, AAS decreased to 0 in 8 patients after the start of
treatment with omalizumab.”*

In summary, patients with CSU with antihistamine-resistant
angioedema with/without wheals should be considered for
treatment with omalizumab 300 mg/4 wk. Importantly, the
differential diagnoses of recurrent angioedema due to CSU
include bradykinin-mediated forms and, in rare cases, idiopathic
angioedema (ie, not mediated by bradykinin or mast cell mediators). Bradykinin-mediated angioedema including hereditary
angioedema and angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitor—mediated angioedema need to be excluded before
omalizumab treatment is considered. This should be done by a
detailed history (eg, early onset of angioedema?, abdominal attacks?, other family members affected?, unresponsive to antihistamine and corticosteroid treatment?), and patients suspected to
have hereditary angioedema should be assessed for blood levels of
Cl -inhibitor function, Cl-inhibitor protein, and C449

 

Should omalizumab be used in patients with CSU
with ClndU? In 10% to 50% of patients, CSU occurs in
combination with CIndU, primarily symptomatic dermographism (SD) and delayed pressure urticaria.'* Some physicians are
hesitant to administer omalizumab in patients with CSU with
comorbid CIndU for several reasons. First, omalizumab is not
licensed for the treatment of patients with CIndU. Second, patients with CSU with comorbid ClndU were excluded from the
omalizumab phase III trials and several other RCTs.”° Third,
trials that compare the efficacy and safety of omalizumab in
patients with CSU with/without CIndU are lacking. However,
comorbidity of CIndU is held to be linked to longer CSU
duration”’ and more severe CSU.**

There is increasing evidence that omalizumab treatment is
effective in patients with CSU plus CIndU. In a retrospective
study, 5 patients with CSU plus delayed pressure urticaria and 1
patient with CSU plus SD had complete symptom control after
the first use of omalizumab.”’ In another report, a 37-year-old
woman with CSU plus pressure urticaria plus SD experienced
complete remission of her 3 urticarias after the first injection of
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL PRACT
VOLUME Mf, NUMBER

TURKETAL 3

TABLE I. The most common and frequent questions on the use of omalizumab in CSU, grouped in 5 domains, and recommendations

based on the available evidence and our experience

 

Questions

1. Which patients with CSU should be considered for omalizumab treatment?

Should omalizumab be used in all 3 CSU phenotypes, wheals and
angioedema, wheals but no angioedema, angioedema but no wheals?

Should omalizumab be used in patients with CSU with CIndU?

Can omalizumab be used in patients with CSU with malignant
diseases?

Can omalizumab be given to patients who receive cyclosporine or other
biologics?

Should omalizumab be used in children with CSU?

Can omalizumab be used in pregnant patients, in patients who want to
become pregnant, or breast-feeding patients?

2. How to start omalizumab treatment in patients with CSU?
How should the response to omalizumab treatment be defined and
evaluated in patients with CSU?

Should any blood tests be done before or during omalizumab
treatment?

What starting dose of omalizumab should be used in patients with
CSU?

Can we discontinue antihistamines in patients with CSU treated with
omalizumab?

Recommendations

Patients with CSU with angioedema with/without wheals should be
considered for treatment with omalizumab 300 mg/4 wk.

Omalizumab can be effective for both CSU and CIndU, although the
administration of omalizumab in isolated CIndU is “off-label.”

Omalizumab can be used for the treatment of CSU in patients with
comorbid malignancy.

A switch from cyclosporine to omalizumab should be offered to all
patients. We suggest that omalizumab and other biologics can be
used simultaneously, following risk/benefit assessment.

Omalizumab is approved in patients with CSU aged > 12 y. In our
experience and opinion, omalizumab can be used for the treatment of
patients with CSU who are younger than 12 y.

On the basis of evidence and our experience, pregnant and breast-feeding
patients with CSU and patients with CSU who want to become
pregnant can be treated with omalizumab (Food and Drug
Administration category B).

 

We suggest using the UCT as the primary instrument to assess treatment
responses to omalizumab in patients with CSU. Whenever possible,
use of the UAS7/AAS and CU-Q,0L/AE-QOL should complement
the use of the UCT.

We suggest to measure blood levels of IgE before and during treatment in
patients with CSU on omalizumab therapy, because pretreatment
IgE levels of <40 IU/mL and a ratio of <2 of week 4/pretreatment
IgE levels may be linked to a higher risk of nonresponse.

On the basis of the evidence and our experience, the starting dose of
omalizumab in patients with CSU should be 300 mg/4 wk.

sgAHs should be taken continuously until the patient shows a complete
response to omalizumab. As soon as complete control is achieved,
sgAHs can be tapered off.

3. How to manage patients with CSU who are complete responders to omalizumab?

For how long should omalizumab be continued in patients who show
complete response?

Can the dose of omalizumab be reduced or the interval of injection be
increased in patients with complete response to omalizumab?

How should omalizumab treatment be discontinued in patients with
complete control of their CSU?

When should omalizumab treatment be reinitiated in patients with
complete response who experience relapse after discontinuation?

How should treatment be adapted and managed in patients who show
complete response and then experience relapse while on omalizumab
treatment?

The evidence and our experience show that a significant proportion of
patients need omalizumab for more than | y. Rather than treating
patients for a fixed length of time, the focus should be on using
omalizumab until the disease is gone.

At present, we do not reduce the dose of omalizumab in complete
responders. We do, however, increase the duration of treatment
intervals in some patients with complete control on 300 mg of
omalizumab, mainly to assess these patients for their optimal
injection intervals and for their need for further treatment.

Omalizumab can be stopped at once and the patient kept under
surveillance and re-treated if CSU relapses, or omalizumab injection
intervals are increased by | wk, if tolerated without reappearance of
CSU signs and symptoms, until 8-wk intervals are reached, and then
treatment discontinuation can be attempted.

In our experience, relapse of CSU after stopping omalizumab cannot be
controlled with antihistamines and omalizumab re-treatment is soon
needed.

If exacerbation is mild, sgAHs can be restarted and/or updosed. If this
does not work, treatment with glucocorticosteroids for up to 10
d may be considered. If this does not work, we suggest that patients
be considered partial responders or nonresponders and treated
accordingly.

4. How to manage patients with CSU who are partial responders or nonresponders to omalizumab treatment?

Should the dose of omalizumab be increased and/or the treatment
interval be shortened in patients with CSU with a partial or no
response to omalizumab? If so, when and how?

In our experience, in patients with worsening of the symptoms at the end
of the interval, we suggest shortening the interval. In patients with
uncontrolled symptoms throughout the interval, we updose before
shortening the interval.

 

(continued)
4 TURK ETAL

TABLE I. (Continued)

J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL PRACT
MONTH 2019

 

Questions

When should omalizumab be discontinued in patients who do not show
a clinical benefit?

Can we add cyclosporine to patients receiving omalizumab? When and
how?

5. How to deal with side effects in patients treated with omalizumab?

How to deal with side effects in patients treated with omalizumab?

Recommendations
On the basis of evidence and our experience, we use omalizumab for a
minimum of 6 mo before considering other treatment options.
Combining low-dose cyclosporine with omalizumab might be an option

to consider especially in patients who show partial response to
omalizumab.

In our experience, mild reactions are usually self-limited. We suggest
treatment discontinuation only in severe reactions.

 

AE-QOL, Angioedema quality of life questionnaire; CU-Q0L, chronic urticaria quality of life questionnaire.

‘ 30 i z 5 :
omalizumab.*’ In addition, a systematic review of 43 trials

including 2 RCTs and several case series showed that CIndU
improved or resolved in most patients with omalizumab.’' The
evidence is strongest for SD, cold urticaria, and solar urti°°? Rates of adverse events were low and rarely led to
treatment discontinuation. Treatment of patients with CSU plus
ClIndU is, therefore, very likely to improve both CSU and
ClIndU, even in patients in whom ClndU is the dominant form
of chronic urticaria.

In summary, patients with CSU who also have CIndU, in our
opinion, should receive omalizumab if needed. The use of
omalizumab, in these patients, is on-label, and there is increasing
evidence and experience in support of the substantial benefits of
omalizumab in patients with CSU plus CIndU.

caria.

 

Can omalizumab be used in patients with CSU with
malignant diseases? This is a question we are frequently
asked by patients with CSU and their physicians. There are no
reports that the use of omalizumab is less safe or effective in
patients with CSU with comorbid malignancy. For now, the
only contraindication to omalizumab is a history of hypersensitivity reactions to omalizumab.*? In patients with asthma, longterm treatment with omalizumab did not increase the risk for
malignancies.”*? As of now, there are no published data on the
effects of omalizumab in CSU with malignant disease.

In our opinion and experience, omalizumab can be used for
the treatment of CSU in patients with comorbid malignancy.

 

Can omalizumab be given to patients who receive
cyclosporine or other biologics? Many patients with
CSU who do not respond to antihistamines, today, are treated
with cyclosporine, either because guidelines used to recommend
both cyclosporine and omalizumab as third-line treatment
options, because omalizumab is not available, or because some
countries’ regulations require patients to fail cyclosporine treatment before omalizumab can be used.*°*” The international
urticaria guideline recommends that omalizumab should be
preferred over cyclosporine for the treatment of antihistamineresistant patients with CSU. Unlike omalizumab, cyclosporine
is not licensed for the treatment of CSU. More importantly, the
risk/benefit profiles of both treatments favor the use of omalizumab.***“° Patients receiving higher doses of cyclosporine are
at increased risk of nephrotoxicity and hypertension, and patients
receiving cyclosporine for a long period appear to be at an
increased risk of malignancy.”

In line with current guidelines, a switch from cyclosporine to
omalizumab should be offered to patients with CSU. In patients

with fully controlled CSU under cyclosporine, reevaluating disease activity and spontaneous remission before starting omalizumab is advisable. In cyclosporine partial responders, we suggest
starting omalizumab while maintaining cyclosporine at the
lowest effective dose. When complete control with omalizumab
is achieved, cyclosporine should be stopped. Once started,
omalizumab should be maintained for no less than 6 months, to
allow “slow responders” to benefit.*' In cyclosporine nonresponders, we suggest to stop cyclosporine and start
omalizumab.’

Patients with CSU have an increased prevalence of autoimmune diseases. ‘”“? Some patients with CSU require treatment of
these disorders with biologics. Whether or not omalizumab can
be given together with another biologic is, therefore, a common
question. There is no published efficacy or safety data on the
combined use of omalizumab and other biologics. But there is
also no reason to suspect that the use of omalizumab in combination with other biologics is less safe or effective. We suggest
that omalizumab and other biologics can be used simultaneously,
following risk/benefit assessment.

 

Should omalizumab be used in children with CSU?
Omalizumab is licensed for use in patients with CSU 12 years or
older. CSU is as prevalent in childhood as it is in adult hood,“*“°
and physicians commonly face the decision on whether or not to
use omalizumab in patients with CSU younger than 12 years.
Several RCTs have revealed the efficacy and safety of omalizumab in patients with CSU 12 years or older.°”!°” As described
in a very recent review, ** there is evidence from only a couple of
case reports on the efficacy and safety of omalizumab in children
with CSU younger than 12 years, so far. In a case series, complete remission could be achieved in 4 children with monthly
subcutaneous injection of 300 mg (n = 2, 10, and 16 years old)
and 150 mg (n = 2, 4, and 5 years old).“° In one case, a child
initially showed partial remission after 300 mg/4 wk omalizumab
but reached complete response after changing the regime to every
2 weeks. In another case report, a rapid total response to 300 mg
omalizumab could be achieved within 1 day after the first injection.” As of now, no adverse events have been reported in
children with CSU treated with omalizumab. Omalizumab is
licensed and used, often at doses higher than in CSU, for the
treatment of children with asthma 6 years or older.

In our experience and opinion, omalizumab can be used for
the treatment of patients with CSU who are younger than 12
years. Patients/parents and physicians should understand that
this is off-label. Studies on omalizumab in children with CSU
who are younger than 12 years old must be performed.

 
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL PRACT
VOLUME Mf, NUMBER

{ All symptomatic CSU patients !

 

 

 

   

v.
Complete :

responder
casei ——

    

  
   

Start reevaluation/
stopping strategy$

 

  
  

Maintain Oma
(biggest interval-lowest
dose effective)

 

 

 

 

STOP Oma

Vv
CSU
relapse

 

 

 

 

 

' Special populations:

| - Pregnancy: Not approved in pregnancy but suggested to be safe. Category B risk status from FDA.
' - Children: Omalizumab is approved for children over 12 years-old. Data suggest it can be considered in younger ages.

resistant to high-dose sgAH

Evaluate
response

Partial

responde
bygeerete =

TURK ETAL 5

 

  
 
    
 
   
    
    
    
 
      

  

paaaiyoe s| asuodsay ajajdwioa se uoos se HyBs jo dojs asimdays

    
 

STOP Oma
Consider other
treatments*

     
 
 

  

 

 

 

 

 
 
   
  

§ Can be achieved by extending treatment intervals or by reducing omalizumab dose to 150mg.
# Can be achieved by using higher omalizumab doses, shortening treatment intervals or by combining both strategies.
¥ Cyclosporine should be preferred, in accordance to current guidelines. Other options can also be considered.

FIGURE 1. Decision making for the treatment of CSU with omalizumab. Cyc A, Cyclosporine A; Oma, omalizumab.

Can omalizumab be used in pregnant patients, in
patients who want to become pregnant, or in
breast-feeding patients? Omalizumab is expected to
cross the placenta and be excreted in small amounts in breast
milk.** No evidence of teratogenicity or embryotoxicity was
observed in preclinical studies.°’ Because of ethical reasons,
clinical trials with omalizumab are not conducted in pregnant
or breast-feeding women. The EXPECT registry on omalizumab treatment in pregnant patients with asthma, a
postmarketing, prospective observational study, reported
no adverse events in 191 pregnant women with asthma
exposed to omalizumab within 8 weeks before conception or
during pregnancy.’' Omalizumab has been assigned pregnancy category B risk status by the Food and Drug
Administration.**

Data on the use of omalizumab in both pregnant and breastfeeding patients with CSU are limited.°°°?>? Until now, 10
patients with CSU receiving omalizumab during 12 pregnancies
have been reported (Table 12°? All: showed complete
symptom control after initiation of omalizumab treatment and
no adverse effects have been reported. All omalizumab-treated
women gave birth to healthy children. There were no abnormalities observed during lactation, though only 5 of 12 children
were breast-fed (Table III). The international guideline suggests
management of pregnant patients with CSU according to the
treatment algorithm used in nonpregnant patients after risk/
benefit management.’

On the basis of this evidence and our experience, pregnant
and breast-feeding patients with CSU and patients with CSU who
want to become pregnant can be treated with omalizumab.*°*”?

 
6 TURK ETAL J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL PRACT
MONTH 2019

Domain 2: How to start omalizumab treatment in
patients with CSU?

How should the response to omalizumab treatment
be defined and evaluated in patients with CSU?
Patient responses to omalizumab treatment are measured by the
use of patient-reported outcome measures such as the urticaria
activity score (UAS), the AAS, or the urticaria control test
(UCT), and response categories are defined on the basis of these
patient-reported outcome measures."°°’ Importantly, the use
of urticaria activity score for 7 consecutive days (UAS7) = 0 as
the definition of complete response has several limitations: (1)
patients with CSU with any itch over the course of a week have
a UAS7 of more than 0 and are classified as nonresponders or
partial responders, independent of whether the itch is linked to
CSU or not; (2) UAS7 does not assess angioedema, a frequent
and disabling symptom of CSU.

We suggest using the UCT as the primary instrument to
assess treatment responses to omalizumab in patients with CSU.
The UCT measures disease control, is easy to use, has high
levels of validity, reliability, and reproducibility, and strongly
correlates with UAS7 and health-related QOL. The UCT can
be used in patients with CSU with and without angioedema,
with and without CIndU. Whenever possible, use of the UAS7/
AAS and chronic urticaria quality of life questionnaire/angioedema quality of life questionnaire should complement the use
of UCT.

   

Onset of effect
On the day after the first injection

No AE episodes during treatment
Differsi

No AE episodes during treatment

Undefined

a g
Ea Ea
3 3
5 E
5 5
"a 3
& E
6 6
8 PI
g &
I 2
5 5
8 §
8 8
n n

During the first week

2-14d
Undefined

Effective in
all patients?
Yes
Yes*}
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes*
Yes
Yes
Yes
Ye:

Omalizumab, dose
(duration of treatment)
300 mg/4 wk (6 mo)
75-300 mg/3-16 wk (1-3 y)
300 mg/4 wk (10-20 mo)
150 mg/4 wk (>1 y)
300-375 mg/3-4 wk (7 mo)

300 mg/2-4 wk (3-12 mo)
300 mg/4 wk (4 mo)

150-300 mg/4 wk
375 mg/2-4 wk (3 y)
300 mg/4-8 wk (1 y)

Yes
Yes
Ye!

excluded

Yes
Yes
Ye:

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Should any blood tests be done before or during
omalizumab treatment? We suggest to measure blood
levels of total IgE before and during treatment in patients with
CSU started on omalizumab, because recent reports and our
experience show that baseline and follow-up total IgE levels are
linked to omalizumab treatment responses.'°°° Jérg et al°!
found that partial/nonresponders had the lowest baseline total
IgE levels in a post hoc analysis. Another study found that
nonresponders had lower baseline total IgE than complete responders.”” Nettis et al®? also found that high baseline total IgE
was the only important predictor of response in multivariate
analysis. More importantly, Ertas et al®? found that nonresponders to omalizumab not only had lower baseline total IgE
but also had lower increase in total IgE levels at the fourth week
of treatment. They showed that the ratio of IgE at week 4 and
IgE at baseline had the highest sensitivity and specificity to
predict a response to omalizumab. On the basis of
these and other findings, pretreatment total IgE levels of less
than 40 IU/mL, a cutoff that was recently found to be linked to
autoimmune CSU,” and a ratio of less than 2 of week 4 and
pretreatment IgE levels may be linked to a higher risk of
nonresponse.

HAE or AE with
known cause

corticosteroids
NA
+
a5
+
+
+
+
ae
+

lh Efficacy of on-demand

  

Efficacy of
prophylactic
doses, daily

sgAHs in hi:

 

 

sex (age, y)

2, 3 (30 and 49)
patients.

 

Patients with AE, number,

What starting dose of omalizumab should be used
in patients with CSU? The recommended starting dose of
omalizumab in patients with CSU is 300 mg/4 wk, according
to the current international guideline’; however, phase III trials
in CSU demonstrated the efficacy and safety of omalizumab at
both 150 mg and 300 mg.” On the basis of the pooled analysis
of these trials, the 300-mg omalizumab dose was shown to be
more effective.*° In addition, doses of 150 mg/4 wk could not
control angioedema episodes and particular QOL parameters.°”
Recently, a systematic review of real-world evidence from 84
studies showed that most patients with CSU (62.7%) received

2, 2 (35-88) and 3, ¢ (39-49)
2, 2 (27-67) and 1, 3 (46)

1, 2 (36) and 1, 3 (55)
3, 9 and 5, 3d (34-70)

1, 3 (47)
1, 2 (34) and 1, 6 (46)

12

3, 3 (50-65)
injection (patient 1) or the symptoms gradually decreased until angioedema disappearance after the fourth dose (patient 2).

  

2013
2012

ES S
S &
&

  

2017
2017
2016
* 2015
Ozturk and Kocatiirk,'°* 2014

  

Efficacy of omalizumab in patients with isolated angioedema

   

AE, Angioedema; +, effective; —, not effective; 3, male; 2, female; HAE, hereditary angioedema; NA, data are not available or specifically defined.

*Relapse after stopping of treatment in s

Sands et al,'°° 2007

TABLE Il.
Author, year
Brunetta et
Faisant et al,'
Muiioz et al
Azofra et al.
Biiyiik6ztiirk et
Wieczorek et
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL PRACT
VOLUME Mf, NUMBER

TURK ETAL 7

TABLE Ill. Patients with CSU received omalizumab during pregnancies

Patients
Author, year with CSU Pregnancies Dose of omalizumab Lactation Safety and efficacy data
Gonzalez-Medina et al,” 2017 n—2 n=2 300 mg/4 wk n= 1/2 No AdEs; complete symptom
control; healthy children
Ensina et al,> 2017 n=2 n=3 1. patient: 150 mg/4 wk; n= 3/3 No AdEs; complete symptom
2. patient: 300 mg/4 wk control; healthy children
Cuervo-Pardo et al,”* 2016 n=4 n=4 300 mg/4 wk Not reported No AdEs; complete symptom

 

control; healthy children

Ghazanfar and Thomsen,°* 2015 n= 150 mg/2 wk, 2, n= 0/2 No AdEs; complete symptom
pregnancy: 300 mg/4 control; healthy child
wk

Vieira Dos Santos et al,’ 2014 evil n=1 150 mg/4 wk; n= 1/1 No AdEs; complete symptom
exacerbation: 150 mg/2 control; healthy child
wk

AdE, Adverse effect.

300 mg as the starting dose.'? In the United States, 8 of 10
patients with CSU receive omalizumab 300 mg as a starting
dose.°’ Responder rates in patients with CSU started on 150 mg
reportedly range from 15% to 35%, lower than the responder
rates of patients started on 300 mg omalizumab.'”°° On the
basis of these reports and our experience, the starting dose of
omalizumab in patients with CSU should be 300 mg/4 wk.

Can we discontinue antihistamines in patients with
CSU treated with omalizumab? Omalizumab is considered an add-on treatment to sgAHs in CSU. However, it has
been shown to be effective without the need for concomitant
sgAH treatment in up to 60% of patients included in 16
studies.'* Although early responders will show complete response
within hours or a few days, late responders can take up to 6
months to achieve it.°’ Because of their mechanism of action,
sgAHs are more effective when taken before urticaria symptoms
occur.

If a patient does not have any benefit from sgAHs before
omalizumab, we suggest to stop them when omalizumab is
started. However, the risk of worsening symptoms should be
discussed with patients before this decision is taken, because a
small, unrecognized benefit might be present. In a patient who
has some benefit from sgAH treatment, this treatment should be
continued until the patient shows a complete response to omalizumab. As soon as complete control is achieved, sgAHs can be
tapered off 257.58

Domain 3: How to manage patients with CSU who
are complete responders to omalizumab?

For how long should omalizumab be continued in
patients who show complete response? Omalizumab,
in patients with CSU, is not a curative or disease-modifying
treatment.” Rather, it very effectively prevents symptoms.
CSU, in most patients, is a self-limited disease. It is crucial to not
stop omalizumab treatment too soon, making symptoms resurface and subjecting patients to avoidable suffering, and to not
stop treatment too late, producing overtreatment and unnecessary health care costs. Complete responders to omalizumab
treatment may be free of CSU symptoms because of the
omalizumab they receive or because their CSU has gone into
spontaneous remission. Thus, guidance on when to stop
omalizumab treatment in complete responders is needed.

As of now, there are no studies on when to discontinue
omalizumab in complete responders. \” There are, currently, no
biomarkers that can help to assess patients on omalizumab
treatment, who have achieved complete symptom control, for
CSU remission.”° Also, there are no markers to predict, in individual patients, when their CSU will go into spontaneous
remission. Higher age at onset, being female, and hypersensitivity to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, as well as
comorbid CIndU, concomitant recurrent angioedema, thyroid
disease, positive autologous serum skin test result, and higher
disease severity at presentation have all been reported to be linked
to longer CSU duration.””7"’”*

 

~ However, none of these markers,
alone or in combination, allows for a meaningful prediction of
disease duration in individual patients, and the decision when to
discontinue omalizumab should not be based on them. Assessing
the need for continued omalizumab treatment in complete
responders is, for now, a trial-and-error process.

CSU lasts for more than 1 year in a substantial proportion of
patients.'°7>”* Omalizumab appears to be safe in patients with
CSU when used for 1 year’ or more.”””””’® Available data from
patients with asthma confirm a remarkable safety profile even
when omalizumab is used for much longer periods,” although a
possible association with cardiovascular and cerebrovascular
events has been reported.” Considering the current evidence,
when omalizumab is well tolerated, concerns about its safety
should not refrain physicians from using it in CSU for as long as
it is needed.

In clinical trials and in real life, relapse rates after stopping
omalizumab are high (Table IV). Most patients receiving omalizumab in the context of clinical trials have experienced
relapse after stopping omalizumab treatment.°”’'°"' In the
XTEND-CIU trial, a relapse rate of 43.4% and 45.1% was
observed during the 12 weeks after withdrawing omalizumab in
patients treated for either 24 or 48 weeks.’ Preliminary results
from the OPTIMA study also showed a 44.4% to 50% relapse
rate after 6 months of treatment.°° A real-life study, including
280 patients, reported that it was rarely possible to stop omalizumab even after 1 to 2 years of treatment.”

Taken together, this evidence and our experience show that a
significant proportion of patients need omalizumab for several

 

 

years, and that multiple attempts to stop treatment may be
needed. Rather than treating patients for a fixed length of time,
the focus should be on using omalizumab until the disease is
TABLE IV. Relapse rates after discontinuation of omalizumab in CSU

Author, year

Nettis et al,°’ 2018
Mandel et al,” 2018
Maurer et al,’> 2018

Kulthanan et al,'°? 2018

Tiirk et al,*’ 2018
Marcelino et al,''° 2018

Niemeyer-van der Kolk
et al,” 2018

Sussman et al,°° 2017
Ghazanfar et al,” 2016

Saini et al,’ 2015
Pinto Gouveia et al,”! 2017

Kaplan et al, 2013'°
Maurer et al,° 2013
Labrador-Horrillo et al,’* 2013

No. of patients
in the study

292 CSU
18 CSU
81 CSU

15 CSU

25 CSU
23 CSU

63 CSU

136 CSU

154 (CSU = 137,
CindU = 17)

81 CSU

13 CSU

252 CSU
79 CSU
110 CSU

NA, Data are not available or specifically defined.

Duration

of CSU
44.1 + 64.3 mo
65 mo
77 + 118.8 mo

2.7 y (n= 3)

44 mo
4 y (3-28 range)

NA

NA

3.8 45.4 y (CSU = 137)

62+ 80y
19.5 y (n = 3)

T0+88y
61473y
NA

Dosage/interval
of omalizumab

300 mg/4 wk
300 mg/4 wk
300 mg/4 wk

150 mg with extended
durations

300 mg/4 wk
NA with extended durations

300-600 mg with extended
durations

300 mg/4 wk

150 or 300 mg with extended
durations

300 mg/4 wk

150 or 300 mg with extended
durations

300 mg/4 wk

300 mg/4 wk

150 mg/2 wk or 300 mg/4 wk

Duration of the
treatment

24 wk
24 wk

24 wk
48 wk

NA

Median, 6 mo

Mean, 30 mo (range,
5-71)
NA

24 wk
ey,
24 wk

10-12 administrations

24 wk
12 wk
11.4 mo (range, 1-48)

Duration of the followup

16 wk

9.5 mo (range, 1-28)

12 wk

Range, 26-38 wk

Range, 8 wk tol8 mo
NA

208 wk

4.7 wk
NA

16 wk
NA

16 wk
16 wk
NA

% of relapses in
follow-up

40.8%
17.6%

43.4%
45.1%

2 of 3 (67%)

11 of 18 (61%)
4 of 11 (36%)

10 of 24 (42%)

44 of 88 (50%)

14 of 24 (58%)
(CSU + CIndU)

NA

2 of 3 (67%)

NA
NA
20 of 41 (47.5%)

6102 HLNOW

8

Tw La WHOL

LOVYd TONNWINI NITO ADYSTIV &F
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL PRACT
VOLUME Mf, NUMBER

gone. Health regulators need to avoid establishing rules that
restrain treatment duration. In contrast, they should support
approaches that allow for individualized omalizumab treatment
such as discontinuation of omalizumab by interval extension, as
outlined in the answer to the following questions. In our own
practice, we maintain patients with CSU on treatment with
omalizumab for 1 year after they have reached complete
response, before we consider discontinuation.

Can the dose of omalizumab be reduced or the interval of injection be increased in patients with
complete response to omalizumab? Some authors have
suggested that it is possible to reduce the dose of omalizumab to
150 mg/4 wk in patients with complete response on 300 mg/4
wk.!?""8?"4 Qmalizumab 150 mg/4 wk was effective in a subset
of patients with CSU in the pivotal clinical trials,°” in the
OPTIMA study,” and in real life.“° More studies on this are
needed. At present, we do not reduce the dose of omalizumab in
complete responders. We do, however, increase the duration of
treatment intervals in some patients with complete control on
300 mg/4 wk of omalizumab, mainly to assess these patients for
their optimal injection intervals and for their need for further

treatment."°

How should omalizumab treatment be discontinued
in patients with complete control of their CSU?
Currently, there are 2 strategies to discontinue omalizumab
treatment. (1) Omalizumab can be stopped at once and the
patient kept under surveillance and re-treated if CSU relapses,
which has been shown to be effective.2?°°*” (2) Omalizumab
injection intervals are increased by 1 week, if tolerated without
reappearance of CSU signs and symptoms, until 8-week intervals
are reached, and then the treatment can be discontinued.“!*°*”
Implementation of this strategy benefits from the recent
approval for self-administration of omalizumab in many
countries.

On the basis of published evidence and our clinical experience, both strategies are effective. The interval extension strategy
has 2 benefits: it can help to identify optimal injection intervals
in individual patients and it minimizes time to re-treatment in
patients who show relapse.”! However, extending treatment intervals can become difficult to manage, because it demands
appointment flexibility and frequent patient observations.

 

When should omalizumab treatment be reinitiated in
patients with complete response who experience
relapse after discontinuation? Recent studies have shown
that up to 61% of patients will experience clinical worsening
after omalizumab discontinuation, ””’”* even if the treatment
was maintained for 1 year.’’ Physicians and patients should be
aware of this possibility and omalizumab should be restarted as
soon as patients experience relapse after discontinuation. In our
experience, relapse of CSU after stopping omalizumab cannot be
controlled with antihistamines, and, therefore, omalizumab retreatment is needed. Re-treatment with omalizumab is effective
in the vast majority of patients previously responding to the
drug,??°0787? even when more than | re-treatment cycle is
needed.”?

 

TURKETAL 9

How should treatment be adapted and managed
in patients who show complete response and
then experience relapse while on omalizumab
treatment? In our clinical experience, exacerbation of CSU
under omalizumab treatment is very rare and may be due to
increased disease activity, loss of omalizumab efficacy, or both. As
of now, the development of antibodies to omalizumab that
impair its effects has not been described. CSU disease activity can
change spontaneously or because of the presence of new and
relevant exacerbators such as drugs, foods, stress, or infection. If
exacerbation is mild, sgAHs can be restarted and/or updosed. If
this does not work, treatment with glucocorticosteroids for up to
10 days may be considered. If this does not work, we suggest that
patients be considered partial or nonresponders and treated
accordingly.

Domain 4: How to manage patients with CSU who
are partial responders and nonresponders to
omalizumab treatment?

Should the dose of omalizumab be increased and/or
the treatment interval be shortened in patients with
CSU with partial or no response to omalizumab? If
so, when and how? Omalizumab updosing can be effective
in partial responder or nonresponder patients with
CSU.***?*? A retrospective observational study reported that
at the end of 3-month therapy, UAS7 of 6 or less was achieved in
43 and 16 of the 79 previously partial responder or nonresponder
(UAS>7) patients with 450 and 600 mg/4 wk, respectively.”*
Twenty patients did not achieve disease control despite high
doses. In another study, 50 of 78 patients with CSU with partial
response to omalizumab 300 mg/4 wk became responders after
updosing to 450 mg/4 wk.’° There are also reports that
switching to shorter treatment intervals can lead to complete
response in patients with partial or no response.”

In our experience, in patients with worsening of the symptoms
at the end of the interval, we suggest shortening the interval. In
patients with uncontrolled symptoms throughout the interval,
we updose before shortening the interval./"”°

When should omalizumab be discontinued in patients who do not show a clinical benefit? Most
patients with CSU who are treated with omalizumab show a fast
response, within days to several weeks.*° Still, some patients are
slow responders.”'” In the phase III studies ASTERIA I and
GLACIAL, the median time for patients treated with 300 mg/4
wk omalizumab to achieve UAS7 of 6 or less (UAS7 = 0) was 6
weeks (12 and 13 weeks, respectively).°” Importantly, patients
who do not benefit by week 12 of omalizumab treatment can
benefit from longer treatment. In the ASTERIA I and GLACIAL
studies, 58% and 48% of the patients who did not respond
(UAS7 > 6) to 300 mg/4 wk omalizumab treatment at week 12
responded with a UAS7 of 6 or less at week 24, respectively.°”
On the basis of these data and our experience, we use omalizumab for a minimum of 6 months before considering other
treatment options.

Can we add cyclosporine to patients receiving
omalizumab? When and how? The current urticaria
guideline recommends cyclosporine as a fourth-line treatment
option in patients with CSU if omalizumab is not effective within 6
10 TURK ETAL

months or earlier.’ However, in selected patients, combining lowdose cyclosporine with omalizumab might be an option to
consider. Although this strategy is not discussed in the current
guideline,’ Eghrari-Sabet et al® reported that immunosuppressive
agents, including cyclosporine, were combined with omalizumab
in 3.2% (17 of 528) of patients with CSU. Furthermore, 4 adult
patients achieved complete resolution of their CSU after adding
1.5 to 3.7 mg/kg of cyclosporine daily to omalizumab 300 mg/4
wk.’” No significant adverse effects were observed.

We also find cyclosporine to be effective as add-on treatment in
patients with CSU who show partial response to omalizumab. In
partial responders to omalizumab, we consider cyclosporine/
omalizumab combination, that is, adding cyclosporine at 2 mg/kg,
after at least 6 months of omalizumab treatment and after using
omalizumab at higher than standard doses and/or shorter than
standard intervals.

Domain 5: How to deal with side effects in patients
treated with omalizumab?

Omalizumab is considered a safe treatment with a low frequency of side effects, and it is licensed for self-administration in
some countries.'”’”” In several studies, the incidence of adverse
events in patients with CSU was comparable or even less to that
in placebo.*°”* Only 4% of patients discontinued treatment
because of adverse events.”

Fatigue, asthenia, headache, and exacerbation of urticaria can
occur.°’°* We find that patients who experience this often do so
after the first or the second treatment only. These reactions are
usually mild, last for hours up to a few days, resolve spontaneously, and respond to treatment in case this is needed. Our
strategy, when this occurs, is to inform patients that these are
known responses and to continue omalizumab treatment.

Severe adverse events that have resulted in the discontinuation
of omalizumab treatment include thrombocytopenia, hypertension, retroperitoneal infection, pelvic abscess, and anaphylaxis.'77°? In our practice, with hundreds of patients with
CSU treated with omalizumab, we have not had a patient with a
severe reaction to this treatment and have not stopped omalizumab treatment because of these side effects.

 

Acknowledgments

Murat Tiirk thanks the European Academy of Allergy and
Clinical Immunology for awarding him the EAACI Clinical
Fellowship (2018). Pavel Kolkhir thanks the European Academy
of Dermatology and Venereology for awarding him the European
Academy of Dermatology and Venereology Research Fellowship
(RF-2017-24). Pavel Kolkhir was also supported by the “Russian
Academic Excellence Project 5-100” and a GA’LEN stipend. We
thank Karoline Krause, Markus Magerl, Martin Metz, Karsten
Weller, and Frank Siebenhaar (all Dermatological Allergology,
Charité), and insu Yilmaz for helpful discussions and feedback on
the manuscript. This project benefited from the global network of
Urticaria Centers of Reference and Excellence (www.ga2len-ucare.
com).

REFERENCES
1. Choi W-S, Lim E-S, Ban G-Y, Kim J-H, Shin Y-S, Park H-S, et al. Diseasespecific impairment of the quality of life in adult patients with chronic spontaneous urticaria, Korean J Intern Med 2018;33:185.

i.

13.

16.

19.

20.

21.

22.

. Maurer M, Rosén K, Hsieh H-J, Saini S, Grattan C, Gimenéz-Arnau A, et

. Finlay A, Kaplan A, Beck L, Antonova E, Balp MM, Zazzali J, et al.

J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL PRACT
MONTH 2019

. Maurer M, Abuzakouk M, Bérard F, Canonica W, Oude Elberink H, Giménez
Arnau A, et al. The burden of chronic spontaneous urticaria is substantial: realworld evidence from ASSURE-CSU. Allergy 2017;72:2005-16.

. Zuberbier T, Aberer W, Asero R, Latiff AA, Baker D, Ballmer-Weber B, et al.

The EAACIGA7LEN/EDF/WAO guideline for the definition,
diagnosis and management of urticaria, Allergy 2018;73:1393-414,

ssification,

 

. Guillén-Aguinaga S, Jéuregui Presa I, Aguinaga-Ontoso E, Guillén-Grima F,

Ferrer M. Updosing nonsedating antihistamines in patients with chronic
spontaneous urticaria: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Dermatol
2016;175:1153-65.

. Kaplan AP, Joseph K, Maykut RJ, Geba GP, Zeldin RK. Treatment of chronic

autoimmune urticaria with omalizumab. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2008;122
569-73.

 

 

Omalizumab for the treatment of chronic idiopathic or spontaneous urtic:
N Engl J Med 2013:368:924-35.

Saini SS, Bindslev-Jensen C, Maurer M, Grob J-J, Baskan EB, Bradley MS,
et al. Efficacy and safety of omalizumab in patients with chronic idiopathic/
spontaneous urticaria who remain symptomatic on HI antihistamines: a randomized, placebo-controlled study. J Invest Dermatol 2015;135:67-75.

. Vestergaard C, Toubi E, Maurer M, Triggiani M, Ballmer-Weber B,

Marsland A, et al. Treatment of chronic spontaneous urticaria with an inadequate response to H1-antihistamines: an expert opinion. Eur J Dermatol 2017;
27:10-9.

 

Omalizumab substantially improves dermatology-related quality of life in patients
with chronic spontaneous urticaria. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 2017;31:
1715-21.

. Kaplan A, Ledford D, Ashby M, Canvin J, Zazzali JL, Conner E, et al.

Omalizumab in patients with symptomatic chronic idiopathic/spontaneous
urticaria despite standard combination therapy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;
132:101-9.

Zhao Z-T, Ji C-M, Yu W-J, Meng L, Hawro T, Wei J-F, et al. Omalizumab for
the treatment of chronic spontaneous urticaria: a meta-analysis of randomized
clinical trials, J Allergy Clin Immunol 2016;137:1742-50.

 

. Bernstein JA, Kavati A, Tharp MD, Ortiz B, MacDonald K, Denhaerynck K,

et al. Effectiveness of omalizumab in adolescent and adult patients with
chronic idiopathic/spontaneous urtic systematic review of ‘real-world’
evidence. Expert Opin Biol Ther 2018;18:425-48.

Kaplan AP, Giménez-Arnau AM, Saini SS. Mechanisms of action that
contribute to efficacy of omalizumab in chronic spontaneous urticaria, Allergy
2017;72:519-33.

 

 

. Chang TW, Chen C, Lin C-J, Metz M, Church MK, Maurer M. The potential

pharmacologic mechanisms of omalizumab in patients with chronic spontaneous urticaria, J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;135:337-42.

  

. Gericke J, Metz M, Ohanyan T, Weller K, Altrichter S, Skoy PS, et al. Serum

autoreactivity predicts time to response to omalizumab therapy in chronic
spontaneous urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2017;139:1059-61.

Deza G, Bertolin-Colilla M, Pujol RM, Curto-Barredo L, Soto D, Garcia M,
et al. Basophil FceRI expression in chronic spontaneous urticaria: a potential
immunological predictor of response to omalizumab therapy. Acta Derm
Venereol 2017;97:698-704.

Larenas-Linnemann DES, Parisi CAS, Ritchie C, Cardona-Villa R, CherrezOjeda I, Cherrez A, et al. Update on omalizumab for urticaria: what’s new in the
literature from mechanisms to clinic. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep 2018;18:33.

 

 

. Maurer M, Weller K, Bindslev-Jensen C, Giménez-Amau A, Bousquet P,

Bousquet J, et al. Unmet clinical needs in chronic spontaneous urticaria, A
GALEN task force report 1. Allergy 2011:66:317-30.

Maurer M, Sofen H, Ortiz B, Kianifard F, Gabriel S, Bernstein J. Positive
impact of omalizumab on angioedema and quality of life in patients with refractory chronic idiopathic/spontaneous urticaria: analyses according to the
presence or absence of angioedema. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 2017;31:
1056-63.

Staubach P, Metz M, Chapman-Rothe N, Sieder C, Bréutigam M, Canvin J,
et al. Effect of omalizumab on angioedema in H1-antihistamine-resistant
chronic spontaneous urticaria patients: results from X-ACT, a randomized
controlled trial. Allergy 2016;71:1135-44,

Staubach P, Metz M, Chapman-Rothe N, Sieder C, Briutigam M, Maurer M,
et al. Omalizumab rapidly improves angioedema-related quality of life in adult
patients with chronic spontaneous urticaria: X-ACT study data. Allergy 2018;
73:576-84,

Zazzali JL, Kaplan A, Maurer M, Raimundo K, Trzaskoma B, Solari PG, et al.
Angioedema in the omalizumab chronic idiopathic/spontaneous urticaria
pivotal studies, Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2016;117:370-7.

    
RTICLE IN PRESS

J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL PRACT.
VOLUME Mf, NUMBER

23.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

83,

34,

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44,

45.

Azofta J, Diaz C, Antepara I, Jauregui I, Soriano A, Ferrer M. Positive
response to omalizumab in patients with acquired idiopathic nonhistaminergic
angioedema, Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2015;114:418-9.

. Craig TJ, Bernstein JA, Farkas H, Bouillet L, Boccon-Gibod I. Diagnosis and

treatment of bradykinin-mediated angioedema: outcomes from an angioedema
expert consensus meeting. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 2014;165:119-27.
Maurer M, Magerl M, Ansotegui I, Aygéren-Piirsiin E, Betschel S, Bork K,
et al. The international WAO/EAACT guideline for the management of hereditary angioedema—the 2017 revision and update. Allergy 2018:73:
1575-96.

Casale TB, Bernstein JA, Maurer M, Saini SS, Trzaskoma B, Chen H, et al.
Similar efficacy with omalizumab in chronic idiopathic/spontaneous urticaria
despite different background therapy. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 2015:3:
743-50.

Sanchez-Borges M, Caballero-Fonseca F, Capriles-Hulett A, GonzdlezAyeledo L, Maurer M. Factors linked to disease severity and time to remission
in patients with chronic spontaneous urticaria. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
2017;31:964-71.

Curto-Barredo L, Spertino J, Figueras-Nart I, Exposito-Serrano_ V,
Guilabert A, Mele-Ninot G, et al. Omalizumab updosing allows disease activity control in patients with refractory chronic spontaneous urticaria, Br J
Dermatol 2018;179:210-2.

Metz M, Ohanyan T, Church MK, Maurer M. Retreatment with omalizumab
results in rapid remission in chronic spontaneous and inducible urticaria.
JAMA Dermatol 2014;150:288-90.

Vieira Dos Santos R, Locks Bidese B, Rabello de Souza J, Maurer M. Effects
of omalizumab in a patient with three types of chronic urticaria, Br J Dermatol
2014;170:469-71.

Maurer M, Metz M, Brehler R, Hillen U, Jakob T, Mahler V, et al.
Omalizumab treatment in patients with chronic inducible urticaria: a
systematic review of published evidence. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2018;
141:638-49.

Ghazanfar MN, Sand C, Thomsen SF. Effectiveness and safety of omalizumab
in chronic spontaneous or inducible urticaria: evaluation of 154 patients. Br J
Dermatol 2016;175:404-6.

US FDA. Xolair (Omalizumab): safety information. Available from: htips://www.
accessdata. fda. gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2015/103976s5224Ibl.pdf. Accessed
May 10, 2018.

Long A, Rahmaoui A, Rothman KJ, Guinan E, Eisner M, Bradley MS, et al.
Incidence of malignancy in patients with moderate-to-severe asthma treated
with or without omalizumab. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;134:560-7.
Busse W, Buhl R, Vidaurre CF, Blogg M, Zhu J, Eisner MD, et al. Omalizumab and the risk of malignancy: results from a pooled analysis. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 2012;129:983-9.

Zuberbier T, Aberer W, Asero R, Bindslev-Jensen C, Brzoza Z, Canonica GW,
et al. The EAACI/GA(2) LEN/EDF/WAO Guideline for the definition, classification, diagnosis, and management of urticaria: the 2013 revision and update. Allergy 2014;69:868-87.

Kulthanan K, Chaweekulrat P, Komoliri C, Hunnangkul $, Tuchinda P,
Chularojanamontri L, et al. Cyclosporine for chronic spontaneous urticaria: a metaanalysis and systematic review. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 2018;6:586-99.
Savic $, Marsland A, McKay D, Ardern-Jones MR, Leslie T, Somenzi O, et al.
Retrospective case note review of chronic spontaneous urticaria outcomes and
adverse effects in patients treated with omalizumab or ciclosporin in UK
secondary care. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol 2015;11:21.

Zuberbier T, Maurer M. Omalizumab for the treatment of chronic urticaria.
Expert Rev Clin Immunol 2015;11:171-80.

Kaplan AP. Therapy of chronic urticaria: a simple, modern approach. Ann
Allergy Asthma Immunol 2014;112:419-25.

Ferrer M, Boccon-Gibod I, Goncalo M, Inaloz HS, Knulst A, Lapeere H, et al.
Expert opinion: defining response to omalizumab in patients with chronic
spontaneous urticaria, Eur J Dermatol 2017;27:455-63.

Confino-Cohen R, Chodick G, Shaley V, Leshno M, Kimhi O, Goldberg A.
Chronic urticaria and autoimmunity: associations found in a large population
study. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2012;129:1307-13.

Kolkhir P, Borzova E, Grattan C, Asero R, Pogoreloy D, Maurer M. Autoimmune comorbidity in chronic spontaneous urticaria: a systematic review.
Autoimmun Rev 2017;16:1196-208.

Pite H, Wedi B, Borrego LM, Kapp A, Raap U. Management of childhood
urticaria: current knowledge and practical recommendations. Acta Derm
Venereol 2013:93:500-8.

Lee SJ, Ha EK, Jee HM, Lee KS, Lee SW, Kim MA, et al. Prevalence and risk
factors of urticaria with a focus on chronic urticaria in children. Allergy
Asthma Immunol Res 2017;9:212-9.

 

  

 

 

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54,

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

6l.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

TURK ETAL 11

Balp MM, Weller K, Carboni V, Chirilov A, Papavassilis C, Severin T, et al.
Prevalence and clinical characteristics of chronic spontaneous urticaria in pediatric patients. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2018;29:630-6.

Saini S, Rosen KE, Hsieh H-J, Wong DA, Conner E, Kaplan A, et al.
A randomized, placebo-controlled, dose-ranging study of single-dose omalizumab in patients with H1-antihistamine—refractory chronic idiopathic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2011;128:567-73.

Ben-Shoshan M, Grattan CE. Management of pediatric urticaria with review of
the literature on chronic spontaneous urticaria in children. J Allergy Clin
Immunol Pract 2018;6:1152-61.

Netchiporouk E, Nguyen CH, Thuraisingham T, Jafarian F, Maurer M, BenShoshan M. Management of pediatric chronic spontaneous and physical urticaria
patients with omalizumab: case series. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 201 2585-8.
Asero R, Casalone R, Iemoli E. Extraordinary response to omalizumab in a child
with severe chronic urticaria. Eur Ann Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;46:41-2.
Namazy J, Cabana MD, Scheuerle AE, Thorp JM Jr, Chen H, Carrigan G, et al.
The Xolair Pregnancy Registry (EXPECT): the safety of omalizumab use
during pregnancy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;135:407-12.

Ghazanfar MN, Thomsen SF. Successful and safe treatment of chronic spontaneous urticaria with omalizumab in a woman during two consecutive pregnancies. Case Rep Med 2015;2015:368053.

Cuervo-Pardo L, Barcena-Blanch M, Radojicic C. Omalizumab use during
pregnancy for CIU: a tertiary care experience. Eur Ann Allergy Clin Immunol
2016;48:145-6.

Gonzalez-Medina M, Curto-Barredo L, Labrador-Horrillo M, GimenezArnau A, Omalizumab use during pregnancy for chronic spontaneous urticaria
(CSU): report of two cases. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 2017;31:e245-6.
Ensina LF, Cusato-Ensina AP, Camelo-Nunes IC, Sole D. Omalizumab as
third-line therapy for urticaria during pregnancy. J Investig Allergol Clin
Immunol 2017;27:326-7.

Hawro T, Ohanyan T, Schoepke N, Metz M, Peveling-Oberhag A, Staubach P,
et al. The Urticaria Activity Score—validity, reliability, and responsiveness.
J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 2018;6:1185-90.

Weller K, Siebenhaar F, Hawro T, Altrichter S, Schoepke N, Maurer M. Clinical
measures of chronic urticaria. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am 2017;37:35-49.
Weller K, Groffik A, Church MK, Hawro T, Krause K, Metz M, et al.
Development and validation of the Urticaria Control Test: a patient-reported
outcome instrument for assessing urticaria control. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2014;133:1365-72.

Weller K, Groffik A, Magerl M, Tohme N, Martus P, Krause K, et al.
Development, validation, and initial results of the Angioedema Activity Score.
Allergy 2013;68:1185-92.

Weller K, Ohanyan T, Hawro T, Ellrich A, Sussman G. Total IgE levels are
linked to the response of chronic spontaneous urticaria patients to omalizumab.
Allergy 2018;73:2406-8.

Jérg L, Pecaric-Petkovic T, Reichenbach S, Cosloysky M, Stalder O,
Pichler W, et al. Double-blind placebo-controlled trial of the effect of omalizumab on basophils in chronic urticaria patients. Clin Exp Allergy 2018;48:
196-204.

Ertas R, Ozyurt K, Atasoy M, Hawro T, Maurer M. The clinical response to
omalizumab in chronic spontaneous urticaria patients is linked to and predicted
by IgE levels and their change. Allergy 2018:73:705-12.

Nettis E, Cegolon L, Leo ED, Rizzini FL, Detoraki A, Canonica WG. Omalizumab chronic spontaneous urticaria: efficacy, safety, predictors of treatment
outcome and time to response. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2018;121:474-8.
Schoepke N, Asero R, Ellrich A, Ferrer M, Gimenez-Arau A, Grattan CEH,
et al. Biomarkers and clinical characteristics of autoimmune chronic spontaneous urticaria (aiCSU): results of the PURIST study [published online ahead
of print June 22, 2019]. Allergy, https://doi.org/10.1111/all.13949.
Eghrari-Sabet J, Sher E, Kavati A, Pilon D, Zhdanava M, Balp MM, et al.
Real-world use of omalizumab in patients with chronic idiopathic/spontaneous
urticaria in the United States. Allergy Asthma Proc 2018;39:191-200.
Sussman G, Hebert J, Gulliver W, Lynde C, Yang WH, Chambenoit O, et al.
Omalizumab retreatment of patients with chronic idopathic urticaria/spontaneous urticaria (CIU/CSU) following return of symptoms: primary results of
the OPTIMA study. Poster presented at the Fall Clinical Dermatology Conference; October 18-21, 2018; Las Vegas, NV.

Kaplan A, Ferrer M, Bernstein JA, Antonova E, Trzaskoma B, Raimundo K,
et al. Timing and duration of omalizumab response in patients with chronic
idiopathic/spontaneous urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2016;137:474-81.
Bérard F, Ferrier le Bouédec M, Bouillet L, Reguiai Z, Barbaud A,
Cambazard F, et al. Omalizumab in chronic spontaneous urticaria patients
nonresponsive to H1-antihistamine treatment: results of the phase IV openlabel SUNRISE study. Br J Dermatol 2018;180:56-66.

 

 
ARTICLE IN PRESS

12

69.

70.

bal

72.

23.

74.

75.

76.

71.

78.

79:

80.

81.

82.

83.

84,

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

TURK ET AL

. Gimenez-Amau AM. Omalizumab for treating chronic spontaneous urticaria:
an expert review on efficacy and safety. Expert Opin Biol Ther 2017517:
375-85.

Ferrer M, Bartra J, Gimenez-Amnau A, Jauregui I, Labrador-Hortillo M, Ortiz
de Frutos J, et al. Management of urticaria: not too complicated, not too
simple. Clin Exp Allergy 2015;45:731-43.

Rabelo-Filardi R, Daltro-Oliveira R, Campos RA. Parameters associated with
chronic spontaneous urticaria duration and severity: a systematic review. Int
Arch Allergy Immunol 2013;161:197-204.

Deza G, Ricketti PA, Gimenez-Arnau AM, Casale TB. Emerging biomarkers
and therapeutic pipelines for chronic spontaneous urticaria. J Allergy Clin
Immunol Pract 2018;6:1108-17.

Gaig P, Olona M, Munoz Lejarazu D, Caballero MT, Dominguez FJ,
Echechipia S, et al. Epidemiology of urticaria in Spain. J Investig Allergol Clin
Immunol 2004; 14:214-20.

Lee N, Lee JD, Lee HY, Kang DR, Ye YM. Epidemiology of chronic urticaria
in Korea using the Korean Health Insurance Database, 2010-2014. Allergy
Asthma Immunol Res 2017;9:438-45.

Maurer M, Kaplan A, Rosén K, Holden M, Iqbal A, Trzaskoma BL, et al. The
XTEND-CIU study: long-term use of omalizumab in chronic idiopathic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2018;141:1138-9.

Vadasz Z, Tal Y, Rotem M, Shichter-Confino V, Mahlab-Guri K, Graif Y,
et al. Omalizumab for severe chronic spontaneous urticaria:
ences of 280 patients. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 201
Har D, Patel S, Khan DA. Outcomes of using omalizumab for more than 1
year in refractory chronic urticaria, Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2015;
115:126-9,

Silva PM, Costa AC, Mendes A, Barbosa MP. Long-term efficacy of omalizumab in seven patients with treatment-resistant chronic spontaneous urticaria.
Allergol Immunopathol 2015:43:168-73.

Di Bona D, Fiorino I, Taurino M, Frisenda F, Minenna E, Pasculli C, et al.
Long-term “real-life” safety of omalizumab in patients with severe uncontrolled asthma: a nine-year study. Respir Med 2017;130:55-60.

Iribarren C, Rahmaoui A, Long AA, Szefler SJ, Bradley MS, Carrigan G, et al.
Cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events among patients receiving omalizumab: results from EXCELS, a prospective cohort study in moderate to severe asthma, J Allergy Clin Immunol 2017;139:1489-95.

Metz M, Ohanyan T, Church MK, Maurer M. Omalizumab is an effective and
rapidly acting therapy in difficult-to-treat chronic urticaria: a retrospective
clinical analysis. J Dermatol Sci 2014;73:57-62.

Ensina LF, de Lacerda AE, Machado LM, Camelo-Nunes I, Sole D. Long-term
omalizumab therapy for refractory chronic spontaneous urticaria: a real-life
experience. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2015;115:536.

Spertino J, Curto Barredo L, Rozas Muiioz E, Figueras Nart I, Serra
Baldrich E, Bonfill-Ortf M, et al. Algorithm for treatment of chronic spontaneous urticaria with omalizumab. Actas Dermosifiliogr 2018;109:771-6.
Kulthanan K, Tuchinda P, Chularojanamontri L, Chanyachailert P, Korkij W,
Chunharas A, et al, Clinical practice guideline for diagnosis and management
of urticaria. Asian Pac J Allergy Immunol 2016;34:190-200.

Gulliver W, Sussman G, Hebert J, Lynde CW, Papp KA, Yang WH, et al.
Omalizumab dose step-up and treatment response in patients with chronic
idiopathic/spontaneous urticaria (CIU/CSU): results from the OPTIMA study.
Poster presented at the 26th Congress of the European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology (EADV); September 13-17, 2017. Geneva,
Switzerland.

   

  

Tiirk M, Maurer M, Yilmaz i. How to discontinue omalizumab in chronic
spontaneous urticaria? Allergy 2019;74:821-4.

Tiirk M, Yilmaz i, Bahgecioglu SN. Treatment and retreatment with omalizumab in chronic spontaneous urticaria: real life experience with twenty-five
patients. Allergol Int 2018;67:85-9.

Tontini C, Marinangeli L, Cognigni M, Bilo MB, Antonicelli L. Omalizumab
in chronic spontaneous urticaria: patient-tailored tapering or planned discontinuation? Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2015;115:147-8.

Kocattirk E. Role of biologics and future perspectives in the treatment of urticaria. Curr Treat Options Allergy 2017;4:428-37.

90.

ol.

92.

93.

94.

95.

96.

OF:

98.

99.

100.

101.

102.

103.

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

110.

J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL PRACT.
MONTH 2019

European public assessment report for XOLAIR. Available from: https://www.
ema.europa.eu/en/medicines/human/EPAR/xolair. Accessed April 21, 2019.
Pinto Gouveia M, Gameiro A, Pinho A, Gongalo M. Long-term management
of chronic spontaneous urticaria with omalizumab. Clin Exp Dermatol 2017;
42:735-42.

Labrador-Horrillo M, Valero A, Velasco M, Jauregui I, Sastre J, Bartra J, et al.
Efficacy of omalizumab in chronic spontaneous urticaria refractory to conventional therapy: analysis of 110 patients in real-life practice. Expert Opin
Biol Ther 2013;13:1225-8.

Matucci A, Nencini F, Rossi O, Pratesi S, Parronchi P, Maggi E, et al. The
percentage of patients achieving complete remission of urticaria increases with
repeated courses of treatment. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 2019:7:339-40.
Kocattirk E, Deza G, Kiziltag K, Gimenez-Arnau AM. Omalizumab updosing
for better disease control in chronic spontaneous urticaria patients, Int Arch
Allergy Immunol 2018;177:360-4.

Niemeyer-van der Kolk T, van Maaren MS, van Doorn MBA. Personalized
omalizumab treatment improves clinical benefit in patients with chronic
spontaneous urticaria, J Allergy Clin Immunol 2018;142:1992-4.

Tiirk M, Kocatiirk E, Ciire K, Yilmaz i. Two-week intervals during omalizumab treatment may provide better symptom control in selected patients with
chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 2018;6:1389-90.

Mawhirt 8, Diaz J, Fonacier L. Concomitant omalizumab and cyclosporine for
chronic idiopathic urticaria: a case series. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2017;
119:844,

Hide M, Igarashi A, Yagami A, Chinuki Y, Inomata N, Fukunaga A, et al.
Efficacy and safety of omalizumab for the treatment of refractory chronic
spontaneous urticaria in Japanese patients: subgroup analysis of the phase 3
POLARIS study, Allergol Int 2018;67:243-52.

Mandel VD, Guanti MB, Liberati S, Demonte A, Pellacani G, Pepe P. Omalizumab in chronic spontaneous urticaria refractory to conventional therapy: an
Italian retrospective clinical analysis with suggestions for long-term maintenance strategies. Dermatol Ther 2018;8:291-301.

Brunetta E, Shiffer D, Folci M, Achenza MIS, Puggioni F, Heffler E, et al.
Omalizumab for idiopathic nonhistaminergic angioedema: evidence for efficacy in 2 patients. Case Rep Immunol 2018:2018:3.

Faisant C, Du Thanh A, Mansard C, Deroux A, Boccon-Gibod I, Bouillet L.
Idiopathic non-histaminergic angioedema: successful treatment with omalizumab in five patients. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2017;37:80-4.

Bucher MC, Petkovic T, Helbling A, Steiner UC. Idiopathic non-histaminergic
acquired angioedema: a case series and discussion of published clinical trials.
Clin Transl Allergy 2017;7:27.

Munoz JP, Casado AF, Taboada AC, Campos Munoz L, Bran EL. Successful
treatment of refractory idiopathic angioedema with omalizumab: review of the
literature and function of IgE in angioedema. Clin Exp Dermatol 2016;41:399-402.

. Ozturk AB, Kocatiirk E, Omalizumab in recurring larynx angioedema: a case

report, Asia Pac Allergy 2014;4:129-30.
von Websky A, Reich K, Steinkraus V, Breuer K. Complete remission of
severe chronic recurrent angioedema of unknown cause with omalizumab.
J Disch Dermatol Ges 2013;11:677-8.

Biiyiikéztiirk S, Gelincik A, Demirtiirk M, Kocatiirk E, Golakoglu B, Dal M.
Omalizumab markedly improves urticaria activity scores and quality of life
scores in chronic spontaneous urticaria patients: a real life survey. J Dermatol
2012;39:439-42,

Wieczorek D, Kapp A, Wedi B, Omalizumab in der Behandlung unterschiedlicher Urtikariasubtypen. Allergo J 2011;20:244-8.

Sands MF, Blume JW, Schwartz SA. Successful treatment of 3 patients with
recurrent idiopathic angioedema with omalizumab. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2007;120:979-81.

Kulthanan K, Tuchinda P, Likitwattananurak C, Weerasubpong  P,
Chularojanamontri L. Does omalizumab modify a course of recalcitrant
chronic spontaneous urticaria? A retrospective study in Asian patients.
J Dermatol 2018;45:17-23.

Marcelino J, Costa C, Aguiar P, Pereira-Barbosa M. Identificagao de diferentes
padroes de resposta ao omalizumab em doentes com urticéria crénica espontinea, Rev Port Imunoalergologia 2018:26:35-46.
