Special paper

The role and choice criteria of antihistamines in allergy
management — expert opinion

Piotr Kuna’, Dariusz Jurkiewicz?, Magdalena M. Czarnecka-Operacz’, Rafat Pawliczak’*, Jarostaw Woron’,

Marcin Moniuszko®’, Andrzej Emeryk®

‘Division of Internal Medicine, Asthma and Allergy, Barlicki University Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, Medical University of Lodz, Lodz,

Poland

Department of Otolaryngology with Division of Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery, Military Institute of Medicine, Warsaw, Poland
3Department and Division of Dermatology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland
‘Department of Immunopathology, Division of Allergology, Immunopathology and Dermatology, Faculty of Biomedical Sciences and

Postgraduate Training, Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland

Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Medical College Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland
“Department of Allergology and Internal Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland
"Department of Regenerative Medicine and Immune Regulation, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland
’Department of Lung Diseases and Rheumatology, 2" Faculty of Medicine, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland

Abstract

Adv Dermatol Allergol 2016; XXxXIII (6): 397-410
DOI: 10.5114/pdia.2016.63942

Allergic diseases are the most common chronic conditions lasting throughout the patient’s life. They not only cause
significant deterioration in the quality of life of patients but also lead to significant absenteeism and reduced productivity, resulting in very high costs for society. Effective and safe treatment of allergic diseases is therefore one of
the main challenges for public health and should be carried out by all the specialists in family medicine, internists
and paediatricians in collaboration with allergists, otorhinolaryngologists and dermatologists. Antihistamines are
most commonly used in the treatment of allergies. Several dozen drugs are available on the pharmaceutical market,
and their generic forms are advertised widely as very effective drugs for the treatment of allergic diseases. What is
the truth? What are the data from clinical trials and observational studies? Are all drugs equally effective and safe
for the patient? According to a panel of experts representing various fields of medicine, inappropriate treatment
of allergies can be very risky for patients, and seemingly equally acting medications may differ greatly. Therefore,
a panel of experts gathered the latest data from the entire scientific literature and analysed the latest standards
and recommendations prepared by scientific societies. This paper provides a summary of these studies and highlights the importance for the patient of the proper choice of drug to treat his allergies.

 

Key words: antihistamines, bilastin, allergic rhinitis, urticaria, allergy.

Which antihistamines should be chosen
according to current standards
and recommendations?

In the last few decades the incidence of allergic diseases has grown to epidemic status. According to the
current data, more than 600 million people suffer from
allergic rhinitis worldwide, approximately 25% of them
in Europe. In the ECAP trial (Epidemiology of Allergic
Diseases in Poland) as many as 30% of respondents
reported allergic rhinitis, less than 7% mentioned urticaria, but over 40% of patients had positive skin tests
with common inhaled allergens (e.g. plant pollen, dust

mites, mould and animal hair). Despite this huge number
of patients, these data are frequently underestimated,
since allergic diseases are generally believed to be trivial
and non-hazardous. However, it has already been proven
that allergic rhinitis, asthma and urticaria are associated
with a significant socioeconomic burden all over the
world — regardless of region, development level and financial status. The total cost of allergic diseases brings
both reduced quality of life and also direct costs of drugs
and health services as well as indirect social costs such
as the absence from work; it also decreases productivity
and concentration and generates learning disorders and

 

 

Address for correspondence: Prof. Piotr Kuna MD, PhD, Division of Internal Medicine, Asthma and Allergy, Barlicki University Hospital,
Faculty of Medicine, Medical University of Lodz, 22 Kopcinskiego St, 90-153 Lodz, Poland, phone: +48 42 677 69 51,

e-mail: piotrkuna@umed.lodz.pl
Received: 29.08.2016, accepted: 18.09.2016.

Advances in Dermatology and Allergology 6, December / 2016

397
P. Kuna, D. Jurkiewicz, M.M. Czarnecka-Operacz, R. Pawliczak, J. Woron, M. Moniuszko, A. Emeryk

 

concomitant diseases. As allergic diseases occur mainly
in the young population (which supports the senior popuation), their consequences are much more costly than
hose of diabetes, coronary heart disease or myocardial
infarctions. In the USA alone, the costs of allergic rhiniis morbidity are estimated at over 25 billion dollars per
year, of which approximately a half consists of indirect
costs, resulting from insufficient disease control. In light
of these studies it is not difficult to notice multidirecional benefits from effective management of allergic
diseases, which improve both the patients’ activity, productivity and quality of life and ultimately decrease the
inancial burden of healthcare systems. Efficient therapy
of the most common allergic diseases is based mainly on
oral antihistamines which are administered simply and,
as a result, have the best compliance among the drugs
recommended for the treatment of allergic rhinitis.
Histamine plays an important role in human physiology, influencing immunoregulation of the acute an
chronic inflammatory response through 4 different types
of receptors, called H1, H2, H3, and H4. Drugs classified in
the first generation of antihistamines (sometimes calle
“classical” antihistamines) act non-selectively. Apart from
all histaminic receptors they also block muscarinic, adrenergic (or adrenoreceptors) and dopaminergic receptors, causing cardiovascular, urinary and gastrointestina
adverse reactions. High lipophilicity and consequently
easy crossing of the blood-brain barrier additionally
intensify the most dangerous adverse events from the
central nervous system, including drowsiness, decreased
concentration, vigilance and psychomotor efficiency as

 

 

 

 

 

Cholinergic activity

Sedative activity

Staub
Bovet

Fenbe i
aki eels Chlorphenyramine

| 5

Terfenadine

Cetirizine
Loratadine

well as reduced ability to learn and memorize, which is
not related to sedation. However, in histamine-dependent allergic diseases the most important role is played
by the H1 receptor, whose stimulation by histamine results in e.g. constriction of smooth muscles (obturation of
inhalatory tract), increased permeability of endothelium
(oedema) and stimulation of sensory nerves and cough
receptors (pruritus, sneeze attacks, rhinorrhoea). Therefore, the discovery of compounds selectively acting on
H1 receptors, currently called second generation drugs,
could be considered the greatest breakthrough during
more than 70 years of the history of antihistamines (Figure 1). On top of the high efficacy, the most importan
feature of these drugs is the incomparably better safety
profile: some of them have the same (or even lower)
number of adverse reactions as placebo. Due to the selective mechanism of action, low penetration of the centra
nervous system (CNS) and lack of interaction with adrenergic, muscarinic and dopaminergic receptors, the secon:
generation drugs are devoid of the majority (if not all)
of the side effects mentioned above; however, some o
them could cause other serious adverse reactions, including body mass gain, inter-drug interactions or potentially
life-threatening cardiotoxicity (in the majority of countries, these preparations have been withdrawn from the
market) (Figure 2). Due to selective antagonism with H
receptors, these drugs are highly effective in reduction
of allergic rhinitis and urticaria symptoms, and the wide
therapeutic index makes it possible to use them in very
high doses without any concerns related to overdosing
toxicity, which with the first generation drugs could lead

Il generation

Desloratadine
Levocetirizine

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Bilastine
Ebastine
Fexofenadine

Rupatadine

eo—_oe—__@_©-@_@_@_©0@—_@

1937 1942 1979

1988

1996 2001 2002 2004 2010

tihistamine activity

Figure 1. Development history of antihistaminic drugs

 

398

Advances in Dermatology and Allergology 6, December / 2016
The role and choice criteria of antihistamines in allergy management — expert opinion

 

 

Liver
metabolizm

Selectivity
of receptors

 

 

 

Figure 2. Adverse effects of antihistamines

Sedation
Action on CNS

Cardiac
effect

 

 

 

to consciousness distur
tress, and even death.
The described characteristics and easy usage as well
as affordable price led to the inclusion of the second generation antihistaminic drugs in all global and local recommendations as the drugs of choice in all forms of allergic
rhinitis and urticaria. The most frequently cited are ARIA
(Allergic Rhinitis and its Impact on Asthma) guidelines,
which discusses pharmacotherapy and presents the
second generation anti-H1 drugs in the first place, recommending them in all adults and children [1]. Additionally, they highlight that the first generation drugs are
not recommended wherever newer drugs are available.
Almost the same recommendations could be found in
the current EAACI/GA(2)LEN/EDF/WAO guidelines of urticaria management, in which non-sedative second generation antihistamines are recommended not only as the
first but also as the second line drugs (after a maximum
4-fold dose increase in case of lack of efficacy of the standard dose administered for 2 weeks).
In light of the presented guidelines it is quite clear that
non-sedative antihistamines are the backbone of allergic
diseases treatment. However, the number of available
drugs brings a dilemma: which drug should be chosen?
Which criteria should be recognized in the decisionmaking process? Patients have different expectations,
concomitant diseases and symptoms intensity, so the answer is not obvious, and each patient should be treated
individually. From an average allergic perspective, the most
important criteria of the drug choice are efficacy and price
but — considering that not all second generation drugs are
totally side effect-free in term of sedation, and their influence on ability to drive and learn is not commonly known
by people — the safety profile and side effects should be
especially taken into consideration in the drug selection

ances, coma, respiratory dis
 

 

 

 

Advances in Dermatology and Allergology 6, December / 2016

rocess. Moreover, there are more and more patients in
allergology practice treated due to concomitant chronic
diseases, so inter-drug interactions are also an important
actor, which should be taken into consideration treating
allergic rhinitis and urticaria [2]. Thus, drugs which are not
metabolized in the liver should be chosen.
As the second generation antihistamines available in
Poland have comparable efficacy in controlling allergic
rhinitis and urticaria symptoms, the most important facor distinguishing them seems to be the influence on the
CNS and the safety of this therapy. Hence, when prescribing an anti-H1 drug according to recommendations we
should first take into consideration the preparations with
he smallest possible sedative effect, wide therapeutic
index, beneficial pharmacokinetics and the lowest number of inter-drug interactions (Figure 3). This selection
is of special importance in patients whose professions
require concentration (such as driving), in which even
a small sedative effect could lead to serious consequences (Figure 4). Here, we present the expert opinion
regarding the role of bilastine in the management of
allergic rhinitis and urticaria as a non-sedative second
generation antihistaminic drug of an extremely favourable safety profile which does not influence the ability
to drive vehicles and other machines, does not have any
interactions with other drugs or alcohol, and (in allergic
patients) decreases drowsiness even when compared to
placebo [3, 4].

 

 

 

 

 

 

The newest antihistamines in the management
of allergic rhinitis and allergic conjunctivitis

Allergic rhinitis is a complex of clinical symptoms
caused by an inflammatory reaction including antibodies immunoglobulins E (IgE) targeting sensitizing aller
399
P. Kuna, D. Jurkiewicz, M.M. Czarnecka-Operacz, R. Pawliczak, J. Woron, M. Moniuszko, A. Emeryk

 

Incidence of treatment emergent adverse events (AEs) (%)

 

4 (1.8%)

Cetirizine 10 mg P-value
(Ve y2:)) (x2 test)

17 (7.5%) 5 (2.2%)
< 0.018

Somnolence

Incidence > 2% in any treatment group.

 

Analysis based on x? test; pair-wise comparisons:

 

tbilastine vs. cetirizine: p = 0.01; Splacebo vs. cetirizine: p = 0.01/bilastine vs.

cetirizine; p < 0.01; *placebo vs. bilastine: p = 0.03/bilastine vs. cetirizine p < 0.01; “bilastine vs. cetirizine p = 0.01.

Figure 3. Efficacy and safety of bilastine 20 mg compared with cetirizine 10 mg and placebo for the symptomatic treat
ment of seasonal allergic rhinitis (somnolence) [3]

 

 

10.4%)

Fatigue

  

P-value
(x? test)
11 (4.8%) 7 (3.1%)

Analysis based on x? test; pair-wise comparisons: ‘bilastine vs. cetirizine: p = 0.01; Splacebo vs. cetirizine: p = 0.01/bilastine vs.
cetirizine; p < 0.01; “placebo vs. bilastine: p = 0.03/bilastine vs. cetirizine p < 0.01; *bilastine vs. cetirizine p = 0.01.

Figure 4. Efficacy and safety of bilastine 20 mg compared with cetirizine 10 mg and placebo for the symptomatic treat
ment of seasonal allergic rhinitis (fatigue) [3]

 

gens. The clinical symptoms of allergic rhinitis include
rhinorrhea, nasal congestion, itchy nose and sneezing [5].
These symptoms are recurrent and intensify after contact
with the allergen. Sometimes the patient’s complaints
include concentration disturbance, fatigue, or snoring.
Allergic conjunctivitis frequently coincides with allergic rhinitis. Eye symptoms, including watering, redness
and itching, usually develop before nasal symptoms.

400

Allergic rhinitis and allergic conjunctivitis are concomitant so frequently that in many countries they are defined
as one condition (e.g. allergic rhinoconjunctivitis).

The symptoms of allergic rhinitis significantly reduce
quality of life; they adversely influence social life and
decrease performance in learning and work. Untreated
(or undertreated) allergic rhinitis (incompatible with recommendations) could lead to complications in the lower
respiratory tract, paranasal sinuses and ears.

Advances in Dermatology and Allergology 6, December / 2016
The role and choice criteria of antihistamines in allergy management — expert opinion

 

In the ECAP trial the incidence of allergic rhinitis was
assessed and attributed to 22.4% of the population under research [6].

According to triggering allergens and duration of exposure time, allergic rhinitis was previously divided into
seasonal, perennial and occupational. In 2001, an international workgroup proposed an ARIA statement with
a new classification of allergic rhinitis based on duration of clinical symptoms. They distinguished periodic
allergic rhinitis (with symptoms not shorter than 4 days
per week or shorter than 4 weeks) and chronic allergic
rhinitis (with symptoms lasting for more than 4 days per
week and longer than 4 weeks) [5]. Depending on the
intensity of symptoms, allergic rhinitis could be split into
mild and moderate/severe.

The choice of drugs for allergic rhinitis treatment is
based on its intensity level and clinical symptoms. In
each case, allergen-specific immunotherapy should be
considered.

Updated recommendations indicate that the second
generation antihistamines (without a sedative effect) and
local glucocorticosteroids are the main drugs used in allergic rhinitis management. Although the second generation
antihistamines reduce itching and sneezing highly effi
ciently, glucocorticosteroids effectively reduce nasal congestion, which is a symptom of delayed allergic reaction.

According to the recommendations published in ARIA
and PoSLeNN (Polskie Standardy Leczenia Niezytow
josa) documentation, the basic treatment of patients
with any form of chronic allergic rhinitis as well as in
moderate and severe periodic allergic rhinitis should
e based on local glucocorticosteroids [7, 8], and oral
antihistamines should complement allergic rhinitis
therapy. The use of oral antihistamines is specifically
justified in patients with concomitant extra-nasal symptoms: pruritus, eye watering and redness, symptoms
rom the mouth and pharyngeal mucosa as well as skin
signs. The second generation oral antihistamines are
indicated, including those without a sedative effect.
Allergic rhinitis involves the nasal cavity, and it is also
a systemic disease, so the systemic treatment would reieve all relevant symptoms of allergic inflammation.
The nasal cavities should be investigated before local administration of glucocorticosteroids. In the case
of very tight nose congestion local drugs are ineffective
ecause they could not be delivered to the entire nasal
mucosa. Patients with anatomical variations (e.g. nasal
septum deviation, hyperplasia of nasal turbinate) have
additional restrictions with administration of intranasal
drugs. Treatment with intranasal glucocorticosteroids
could be associated with adverse reactions (burning sensation, pain, bleeding) which could discourage patients
from taking such drugs. The full effect of the drug could
be apparent at 5-7 days of its administration; however,
the relief of symptoms could be observed within a few
hours after the administration of the second generation

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Advances in Dermatology and Allergology 6, December / 2016

antihistamines. This is very important in patients with
periodic allergic rhinitis, when the duration of the condition is shorter than the onset of action of intranasal
glucocorticosteroids. Physicians and patients are also
discouraged by the quite widespread phobia of steroids.
For these reasons, many patients prefer to use oral drugs
instead of intranasal drugs. Therefore, the therapy with
the second generation antihistamines seems to be more
beneficial. Favourable tolerability and safety profile of the
drug should always be considered when taking a decision on the choice of an antihistamine. Bilastine is the
most modern drug in this group, and meets the criteria
mentioned above.
In a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled
clinical trial Horaka et al. [9] compared in Vienna Challenge Chamber conditions outside the pollen season the
fficacy of bilastine, cetirizine and fexofenadine in relieving nasal and extra-nasal (mainly ocular) symptoms of
lergic rhinitis. They found that bilastine in a dose of
20 mg is effective in relieving the nasal and extra-nasal
symptoms of seasonal allergic rhinitis. Bilastine is characterized by fast onset of action already at one hour after
administration, and the effect lasted over 26 h. Bilastine
is more effective when compared to placebo in relieving
allergic rhinitis symptoms, and its efficacy in relieving
the nasal symptoms of allergic rhinitis was comparable
with cetirizine. Compared to fexofenadine in the dose of
120 mg, bilastine in the dose of 20 mg is significantly
more effective in relieving nasal symptoms of seasonal
allergic rhinitis in the period between the 22™ and 26" h
after its administration.

In another randomized, double-blinded clinical trial,
the efficacy of bilastine in the dose of 20 mg and cetirizine in the dose of 10 mg was compared with placebo
in 681 patients from 61 European sites [3]. The results
showed that bilastine in the dose of 20 mg administered
once a day for 2 weeks was more effective than placebo
in relieving the symptoms of seasonal allergic rhinitis.
Bilastine showed the same efficacy as cetirizine in relief
of nasal and extra-nasal symptoms of allergic rhinitis for
the entire 14 days of treatment. Bilastine decreased the
intensity of patient’s discomfort associated with allergic
rhinitis comparably to cetirizine.

In a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled
clinical trial bilastine (20 mg), desloratadine (5 mg) and
placebo were administered to 721 patients at the age beween 12 and 70 years with seasonal allergic rhinitis [10].
t was found that bilastine administered for 2 weeks in
a dose of 20 mg efficiently relieved the symptoms of seasonal allergic rhinitis. Additionally, bilastine significantly
reduced the symptoms of allergic rhinitis as compared to
placebo. Efficacy of bilastine and desloratadine in relief of
nasal and extra-nasal symptoms of allergic rhinitis after
7 and 14 days was similar. Comparably to desloratadine,
ilastine improved the quality of life in patients with allergic rhinitis.

 

 

fo}

 

it)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

401
P. Kuna, D. Jurkiewicz, M.M. Czarnecka-Operacz, R. Pawliczak, J. Woron, M. Moniuszko, A. Emeryk

 

In a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled
clinical trial Sastre et al. [11] compared the efficacy of bilastine and cetirizine in the treatment of allergic rhinitis.
It was found that the efficacies of bilastine and cetirizine
are similar and significantly higher when compared to
placebo. Additionally, bilastine was found to be effective,
safe and well tolerated in 12 months of treatment.

To conclude, it should be stated that bilastine is an
fective drug in relieving nasal and ocular symptoms
allergic rhinitis, and it shows fast and durable activity after the administration of a single dose. The efficacy
of bilastine is comparable with the efficacy of cetirizine,
desloratadine and fexofenadine in relieving the symptoms of allergic rhinitis. Bilastine significantly improves
quality of life in patients with allergic rhinitis.

Foo

 

The newest antihistaminics in the management
of urticaria

 

Urticaria has always been related to the antihistaminic
treatment. It results from the fact that histamine is one
the basic mediators responsible for the development of
all the main-symptoms of the disease, such as erythema,
oedema, pruritus/itching and burning sensation. However,
nowadays it has become evident that besides histamine a
very wide panel of various mediators is also involved in urticaria clinical appearance, and both synthesis and release
of these mediators are dependent on different, sometimes
complex etiologic and/or triggering factors, which unfortunately often remain unclear [12, 13].

Depending on the duration of clinical symptoms (the
time since the first episode of urticarial wheals), urticaria
can be classified as acute (up to 6 weeks) or chronic (over
6 weeks). From the clinical point of view, causes and coexisting triggering factors are highly difficult to define in
patients with chronic spontaneous urticaria. Generally,
autoimmune (autoreactive) or infection-related causes
(focuses of latent infections, Helicobacter pylori, parasitic
infestations, etc.) may be identified. However, there are

 

 

still remaining clinical cases which need to be classified
as chronic spontaneous urticaria of an unknown cause.
Within this group of patients urticarial wheals (often accompanied by symptoms of angioedema) erupt spontaneously, without either any specific or predictable cause or
triggering factor.
he current urticaria classification was prepared, presented and published in 2014 by a group of experts representing international scientific societies in allergology
and dermatology (Table 1) [14].
he general rules related to the management of
chronic urticaria were also presented in the guidelines
published in 2014 (Figure 5). Thus, in case of the lack of
efficacy of the classical dose of a modern antihistaminic,
the dose should be increased, sometimes even up to
four-fold. If the treatment is still ineffective, it should be
in addition to the high dose of the new generation antihistaminic supplemented with cyclosporine A, omalizumab or montelukast. Obviously, the exchange of a modern
antihistaminic for another medication of the same group
(obviously of different pharmacological characteristics)
should also be individually considered. Moreover, it
should be pointed out that evidence of the safety and
efficacy of high dose-treatment with antihistaminics has
been proven and is available only for some selected modern antihistamines, and therefore potential medications
of choice should be limited to this group only. Obviously
if exacerbations in the course of urticarial and/or angioedema symptoms develop, a short-term (up to 1 week)
systemic treatment with glucocorticosteroids is possible.
It should be highlighted that systemic glucocorticosteroids should never be regarded as the therapy of choice
in patients with chronic spontaneous urticaria. Unfortunately, there are still many doubts about the proper
understanding and clinical implementation of guidelines
regarding diagnosis and therapy of chronic urticaria. It
has been highly surprising to find out that only 30% of
physicians responsible for treatment of urticarial patients

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 1. Classification of chronic urticaria subtypes (presenting with wheals, angioedema, or both) (based on [14})

 

Subtypes of chronic urticaria

 

Chronic spontaneous urticaria

Induced urticaria

 

Spontaneous eruption of wheals, angioedema or both

Symptomatic dermographism (urticaria factitia)

 

symptoms 2 6 weeks of known or unknown cause

Cold urticaria (contact cold urticaria)

 

Delayed pressure urticaria (pressure urticaria)

 

Solar urticaria

 

Hot urticaria (hot urticaria, contact hot urticaria)

 

Vibration-induced angioedema

 

Cholinergic urticaria

 

Contact urticaria

 

Water urticaria

 

402

Advances in Dermatology and Allergology 6, December / 2016
The role and choice criteria of antihistamines in allergy management — expert opinion

 

have actually familiarised themselves appropriately with
that important paper.

Another exceptionally important fact which should be
underlined (and which was also reflected in the current
guidelines) is that in the treatment of urticaria two or more
antihistamines should never be combined. For example, it
is a grave error to recommend two tablets of bilastine in
the morning, and 1-2 tablets of levocetirizine in the evening. Unfortunately, despite previous guidelines from the
year 2009 and the new updated version, such mistakes still
occur in the daily clinical practice. It should be strongly underlined that this type of approach is simply wrong: higher
efficacy of a combined antihistaminic treatment (2 or more
antihistaminics combined together) has never been confirmed; and finally the risk of combined adverse reactions
to the administered drugs is significantly high.

Bilastine is a modern antihistaminic, which was thoroughly and specifically evaluated in the treatment of patients with chronic spontaneous urticaria related to different causes as well as in patients with chronic induced
urticaria (e.g. cold-induced chronic urticaria). There is
comprehensive documentation available regarding both
the efficacy and safety of this medication administered
in high doses and, even more importantly, there is also
well-documented in vivo (microdialysis of the skin) antiinflammatory activity of bilastine. The studies performed
by Zuberbier et al. provide the best evidence [15-18].

From the clinical standpoint, it is also very important
to remember that the old generation of antihistaminics
is absolutely not indicated in the treatment of chronic
spontaneous urticaria, and only in case of acute urticaria
and/or angioedema if parenteral treatment is necessary
may this group of antihistaminics be administered. However, in such cases systemic glucocorticosteroids should
be concomitantly required. It is considered to be the preventive treatment in terms of possible development of
a systemic anaphylactic reaction [19].

To summarize, chronic spontaneous urticaria still remains a difficult challenge for us. Characterized by an
often unclear and highly complex aetiopathogenesis, it
requires treatment based on both wide clinical experience and knowledge of current guideline. The proper,
selective choice of modern antihistaminic medication
should be based on robust knowledge and available
evidence regarding both efficacy and safety of high-dose
antihistaminic treatment.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Cardiovascular safety of antihistamines

he newest antihistamines of the second generation currently registered and used in Poland have relatively high cardiovascular safety. It results from their
relatively high receptor selectivity and use of centralized
electrocardiography (ECG) evaluation by cardiologists in
all phases of clinical trials with the new drugs. Finally,
this leads to early elimination of drugs which (albeit to

 

 

Advances in Dermatology and Allergology 6, December / 2016

 

First line:
modern second generation antihistamines

 

If symptoms persist after
t 2 weeks

Second line:
increase dosage up to fourfold of modern
second generation antihistamines

 

 

 

 

If symptoms persist after
1-4 further weeks

 

v

Third line:
add on to second line: omalizumab or ciclosporin A
or montelukast. Short course (max. 10 days) of
corticosteroids may also be used at all times if
exacerbations demand this

 

 

 

 

Figure 5. Recommended treatment algorithm for chronic
spontaneous urticaria [14]

 

a small extent) influence ion channels. The review of the
whole published literature showed that to date only 171
publications have addressed the problem. Astemizole
was one of the first drugs which led to more interest in
the influence of antihistamines on the heart. It is interesting that the first published data were favourable [20].
Only the later clinical studies in human and experimental
animal studies indicated that the drug had the ability of
strongly inhibiting potassium channels in cardiac muscles
cells. The consequence of that process is delayed repolarization of ventricular muscle cells, which is clinically
presented as the prolongation of QTc interval. Its direct
result is a significant increase of risk of life-threatening
ventricular arrhythmias. However, the clinical data show
that this phenomenon is observed mainly in the case of
administration of high doses, exceeding registered and
recommended doses, metabolic interactions or in specific situations, e.g. hypoxia of cardiac muscle cells [2128]. The drugs mentioned above were withdrawn from
he market due to relatively high risk of cardiovascular
adverse events [26-28]. Any concerns whether blockade
of potassium channels is an antihistamines class effect
were quickly dispelled by indicating that this process
is not associated with drugs other than the ones menioned above [21, 29, 30]. Since then, in clinical trials with
all antihistamines their clinical features regarding the inluence on QTc interval have been meticulously assessed.

New guidelines regarding treatment of chronic uricaria slightly changed our view on the potential and
actual safety of antihistamines. Established management including increasing the standard dose of the antiistamine to a four-times higher dose could potentially
prolong the QTc interval. The majority of antihistamines
ave not been subjected to clinical studies with those
doses conducted in adequately large populations. Moreover, after the publication of the guidelines there were

 

 

 

 

 

403
P. Kuna, D. Jurkiewicz, M.M. Czarnecka-Operacz, R. Pawliczak, J. Woron, M. Moniuszko, A. Emeryk

 

also additional publications that showed that in some
cases and for some antihistamines a four-times higher
ose could be inefficient — and possibly in such cases
even a six-fold higher dose should be used in the treatment of chronic urticaria. There have been no published
clinical trials addressing the problem of cardiovascular
safety of antihistamines in doses six times higher than
standard doses. Relatively well-designed studies regarding cardiovascular safety were conducted with bilastine.
is drug administered in doses from 20 mg up to 100 mg
a five-fold higher dose than registered) in 30 healthy volnteers did not influence either the morphology of the
CG signal or the QTc interval [31]. The QTc prolongation
id not exceed 5.0 ms (95% Cl: 2.0-8.0) for high doses of
e drug. Moreover, when bilastine was administered in
combination with ketoconazole 400 mg, the QTc interval
and morphology of the ECG signal were similar to placebo [31]. Those clinical trials were conducted according
0 recommendations of E14 — the International Conference of Harmonisation (ICH) [31]. None of the conducted
clinical trials showed any influence of bilastine on the
morphology of the ECG signal and QTc interval. Thus, it
could be stated that the cardiovascular safety of bilastine
is very high, and the influence of the drug on morphology
of the ECG signal and cardiac muscle repolarization is the
same as that of placebo [10, 15, 32-44].

 

Aum S

 

 

 

 

Use of antihistamines in treatment of viral
infections of the upper respiratory tract

Taking into consideration the pathophysiology of uper respiratory tract infection, the non-sedative antihistamines of the second generation could have symptomatic
activity, improving quality of life of those patients. This
question has been relatively rarely studied, and to date
ewer than 100 articles on this topic have been published.
he results of a meta-analysis of available clinical studies
showed that drugs from this therapeutic class could have
important symptomatic activity during the initial period,
especially in the first days of infection [45]. They are efective mainly in adult patients [45]. It seems that apart
rom the relatively weak effect blocking the H1 receptor,
he extra-receptor anti-inflammatory activity could be
even more important. For example, bilastine, inhibiting
release of IL-6 and IL-8, could potentially have some efect [15]. Obtaining convincing results of clinical trials and
ormulating unambiguous conclusions require further
in vivo and in vitro studies.

 

 

 

 

 

Past, present and future of antihistamines.
What should be considered from the
pharmacologist’s perspective?

The 21* century gives us the possibility of the practical use of personalized pharmacotherapy, which includes,
in the broad sense, safety of therapy as one of the most

404

important criteria of

rug choice. This is a direction of evo
lution and development of particular therapeutic groups,

and the best example:
characterized by high
safety profile. The la
the risk of adverse e

S are some antihistamines, which are
effectiveness and also by an optimal
ter factor includes the reduction of
vents and also the reduction of the

risk of interactions when antihistamines are administered
as a component within a multi-drug therapy.

The introduction of the second generation drugs
brought many benefits for patients with indications for
these drugs. The biggest progress was seen according to
the possibilities of adjusting the drug to the individual
patient’s need with additional reduction of the number
and intensity of adverse events, what directly translates
into patient’s compliance. Contrary to the first generation drugs, the second generation shows high selectivity
against type 1 histamine receptors with minimal or lack
of affinity to other groups of receptors, which does not
intensify the therapeutic effect but increases the risk of
occurrence of adverse events.
Low (or even a lack of) affinity to other groups of receptors, such as muscarinic, a1 adrenergic and dopaminergic, limits the occurrence of adverse events, e.g. visual
disturbances, dry mouth, sedative effect, and difficulties
in passing urine, which all reduce the quality of life. As
it has been previously mentioned, they frequently cause
incompliance, and even treatment interruption, which
translates into treatment efficacy and final outcomes.

Lipophilicity and distribution volume of the second
generation drugs are not so large as for the first generation drugs, which prevents their crossing of the bloodbrain barrier and induction of adverse events in the CNS
including excessive sedation, drowsiness, fatigue and
significant reduction of psychomotor efficiency.

Lack of influence on central H1 receptors prevents appetite increase and weight gain. This is especially important in patients with diabetes, hypercholesterolaemia or
overweight patients because body mass gain increases
insulin resistance and the likelihood of related complications.

Very beneficial changes in the mechanism of action
of the antihistamines of the second generation led to the
situation in which they are the preferred group of drugs
in clinical practice.

Currently, there are very few or even no indications
for the first generation drugs. They are used for a short
period as components of complex drugs administered in
the symptomatic treatment of cold and influenza, where
they act mainly as anticholinergics. In patients with rhinitis with concomitant nasal congestion a1 adrenolytic
activity could even be harmful.

Unquestionably, the second generation drugs form
a category that is not homogeneous. Their pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic characteristics determine
their features, which are frequently criteria of choice.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Advances in Dermatology and Allergology 6, December / 2016
The role and choice criteria of antihistamines in allergy management — expert opinion

 

It should be remembered that allergic reaction and
concomitant symptoms very often coexist with other
acute or chronic diseases. Thus, during administration of
antihistamines the high risk of both pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic interactions should be considered.
From a practical point of view, the pharmacokinetic interactions are the most important in this group of drugs,
and they take place during the metabolism stage via isoenzymes of cytochrome P450.

Therefore, the risk of adverse interactions unquestionably increases when antihistamine is metabolized
via cytochrome P450. To prevent inter-drug interactions
and their clinical consequences and the need for treatment modification, drugs not metabolized via CYP450
should be chosen. One such drug is bilastine. It should
be highlighted that one of the most important criteria of
antihistamine choice is the risk of interaction in multidrug therapy, also taking into consideration that allergic
diseases and asthma are chronic diseases, which especially increases polypragmasia risk. Available pharmacoepidemiological studies indicate that the risk of excessive polytherapy increases four to five times in patients
with allergic diseases. Other observations supplement
this hypothesis and confirm that the risk of excessive
polytherapy is especially high during treatment of cardiovascular disease, analgesic treatment and therapy of
allergic diseases.

Additionally, it is worth remembering that there is
a notable risk of interactions within the antihistamine
group, which is associated with characteristics of particular drugs.
Bilastine is one of the newest drugs in the second
generation antihistamines. It has a very interesting activity profile because bilastine is a new molecule, with
its own pharmacological characteristics. It should be
underlined, as there are many available antihistamines
after “metamorphosis”, which are metabolites or isolated
enantiomers of basic compounds, e.g. levocetirizine and
desloratadine. As enantiomers and metabolites often
maintain the pharmacodynamic specificity of a native
drug, this “metamorphosis” does not always bring significant benefits associated with drug activity. Hence, this
could have a very low influence on decreasing the risk
of interactions, especially pharmacokinetic, which could
occur with other concomitantly administered drugs.
Bilastine is a drug of high affinity to the H1 receptor.
It does not bind to muscarinic receptors and does not
have any sedative activity. Bilastine does not show any
adverse interactions with other concomitant drugs as it
does not undergo liver metabolism. The drug is excreted
with faeces in an unchanged form, but a small portion of
it is excreted with urine. Bilastine dosage should not be
modified in patients with renal and hepatic insufficiencies. It could be safely taken by patients driving vehicles,
and it does not influence the QTc interval in the ECG

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Advances in Dermatology and Allergology 6, December / 2016

record, which significantly improves the cardiovascular
safety profile as compared to the class.

Concomitant administration of drugs influencing
activity of glycoprotein P or polypeptides transporting
organic anions or their substrates could change the concentration of bilastine. Administration of ketoconazole
or erythromycin at the same time increases bilastine
area under the curve (AUC) and Cmax, whilst diltiazem
increases the drug plasma concentration. Ritonavir and
rifampicin could decrease the bilastine plasma concentration.

Bilastine does not intensify the depression of the CNS
caused by lorazepam or alcohol-induced disturbances. In
the case of other antihistamines, especially penetrating to
the CNS, their intensification of central depression should
be considered. Tricyclic antidepressants and other cholinolytic drugs intensify the anti-muscarinic effect.

Cholinolytic activity of antihistamines weakens the
effect of mucolytic and mucokinetic drugs, so in patients
who use them it is recommended to choose an antagonist
of the H1 receptor, which is deprived of anti-muscarinic
activity — and bilastine is such a drug. Antihistamines easily penetrating to the CNS intensify sedative activity and
increase the risk of adverse events occurring concomitantly with administration with phenothiazines, fenspiride,
benzodiazepines and antidepressants with sedative activity (mianserin, mirtazapine, trazodone). During bilastine
administration, such interactions are of no clinical importance.

In patients driving motor vehicles and mechanical
machines, the sedation and prolonged reaction time are
a very important problem. It should be remembered that
during long-term administration of sedative antihistamines the phenomenon of reduction of psychomotor
efficacy is not decreased. However, this adverse event is
changed qualitatively. Practically, it means that patients
do not have any individual feelings of prolonged reaction
ime and sedation, but it does not mean that a patient is
ully efficient.
Using antihistamines with sedative activity is part of
he bigger problem of road accidents, which is connected
(0 the public health area. Every fifth accident is caused by
atients taking drugs which could impair their psychomoor efficacy. There are some publications comparing imairment of psychomotor efficacy after administration of
antihistamines of the old generation to alcohol-induced efects. For instance, the effect after taking clemastine is the
equivalent of consumption of 0.8 g/l of alcohol. Bilastine
does not produce such impairment of psychomotor effi
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

cacy, which is otherwise possible duri
cetirizine (the most frequently used
are more details on this topic in the

 

ng administration of
rug in Poland). There
iterature presenting

 

a problem of adverse events in clinical practice. The antihistamines of the first generation as well as cetirizine, being a metabolite of hydroxyzine, could lead to reduction of
attention and vigilance, contributing to impairment of psy
405
P. Kuna, D. Jurkiewicz, M.M. Czarnecka-Operacz, R. Pawliczak, J. Woron, M. Moniuszko, A. Emeryk

 

chomotor efficacy. Nevertheless, contrary to the common
elief this has a negative reflection not only in the working population (however, the effect in this group seems
‘0 be the strongest). Children taking cetirizine could have
a problem with learning and with concentration at school,
resulting both from antihistamine activity and also from
anticholinergic action of that drug. This is a common probem of children, parents and teachers. Sometimes parents
and teachers are unable to define an underlying reason for
school problems, and they actually refer to the activity of
hese drugs.

Falls as a consequence of pharmacotherapy also have
some importance. Hydroxyzine and cetirizine are close
after benzodiazepines and opioids on the list of drugs
increasing the risk of falls in elderly patients.

There are known factors in practice which increase
he probability of sedation as a result of treatment with
antihistamines. They are as follows: female gender; very
young or very old age; hepatic or renal insufficiency;
eart failure; obesity; hypothyroidism; hypotension; deydration; slow acetylator phenotype.

According to reported data, pharmacological aspects
of drugs’ activity clearly translate into clinical activity, so
hey have to be taken into account even during choice
of symptomatic drugs, including antihistamines. The adverse events profile and interactions of antihistamines
constitute important criteria of their choice in clinical
ractice. Failure to take this into consideration during
combined therapy could lead to complications of allergic
disease management.

Bilastine shows the lowest risk of interactions with
other drugs as compared with different antihistamines,
which is associated with its pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profile [46-58].

 

 

 

 

Antihistamines and immune system. Preliminary
results of a study evaluating mechanisms of
anti-inflammatory action of bilastine

For a long time, several actions of antihistamines
ave been attributed to their putative anti-inflammatory
eatures, not directly associated with the histamine receptor. The majority of those studies were conducted
in vitro and demonstrated smaller or greater ability of
antihistamines to, among other things, decrease the exression of adhesive molecules on the surface of endohelial cells as well as epithelium in the upper and lower
respiratory tract, reduce eosinophilia in tissues involved
in the allergic inflammatory process, shorten eosinophil
survival time, decrease expression of inflammatory cytokines (IL+1B, IL-4, IL-6, IL-7, IL-8, GM-CSF), inhibit release
of metalloproteinases, reduce oxidative stress and decrease replication of rhinoviruses in epithelial cells in the
respiratory tract. A recent study performed by Krause
et al. [15] showed in a clinical setting that use of bilastine in a four-fold higher dose as compared to a standard

 

 

 

406

dose in patients with cold urticaria led to a significant
decline of IL-6 and IL-8 concentrations assessed after
skin microdialysis a few hours after a provocation test
with cold. This study confirmed in vivo anti-inflammatory
activity of bilastine; however, it did not identify either the
source of cytokines’ release or their further influence on
the immune response. Therefore, we set out to perform
a more precise assessment of the effects of bilastine on
different arms of the immune response. We analysed
the effects of different bilastine concentrations on such
crucial orchestrators of the immune response as different subpopulations of monocytes that are precursors
of macrophages and dendritic cells and different subpopulations of CD4+ and CD8+ lymphocytes with either
regulatory or effector potency. Currently, our large-scale
basic research is being conducted, evaluating the effect
of both standard and higher doses of bilastine on phenotype as well as functional potential of above-mentioned
subpopulations of immune cells. The current studies on
bilastine are among the first such comprehensive tria
to evaluate the effects of antihistamines’ activity on different elements of cell-mediated immunity. The results
of these studies will give a chance to more precisely

n

S

 

Ga

 

assess immunomodulatory activity of bilastine, and i
consequence contribute to better understanding of i
mechanisms of action in management of such complex
inflammatory diseases as chronic urticaria.

 

 

Antihistamines in paediatric patients and
patients with asthma

The second generation antihistamines that are currently available and the most frequently used fail to meet
all expectations of paediatricians and allergologists, especially in terms of safety and adverse events. Moreover,
not all formulations of these drugs are acceptable for
children. An ideal oral antihistamine of the second generation dedicated to paediatric patients should meet the
following criteria [59-61]:
¢ Very high selectivity against the H1 receptor (lack of
extra-receptor activity).

Fast onset of action.

* Long biological half-time (possibility to administer
once a day).

Registration for patients aged 0-18 years (the same
drug in all age groups, availability of different forms
of the drug).

Very good tolerability.

Indications for the use of antihistamines in children
are generally similar to indications in adults. However,
there is not such strong evidence for some indications
in this population as in adults. The first generation antihistamines are not indicated in children due to many
adverse events connected to activity of these drugs
against other than H1 receptors in peripheral tissues’
(muscarinic, a-adrenergic and serotonin receptors) and

 

 

Advances in Dermatology and Allergology 6, December / 2016
The role and choice criteria of antihistamines in allergy management — expert opinion

 

H1 receptors in CNS, or cardiac ion channels [62]. A few
years ago Schad and Skoner summarized the role and
position of antihistamines for use in children [63]. In this
systemic review of indications for using antihistamines
in children, the authors emphasised that the strongest
recommendations for antihistamines were established
for allergic rhinitis and allergic conjunctivitis as well as
urticaria (evidence category |, strength of recommendation A). Slightly weaker recommendations are for allergic
conjunctivitis and mosquito bites or eosinophilic cellulitis
(Wells’ syndrome) (evidence category |, strength of recommendation B). Other considered or possible indications, such as asthma or otitis media, failed to receive
positive recommendations in this review. Benedictis et al.
presented a similar statement [64].

 

 

Allergic rhinitis and allergic conjunctivitis

In light of the ARIA 2008 and ARIA 2010 documents,
the second generation antihistamines (oral or intranasal)
are the drugs of first line treatment of periodic allergic
rhinitis of mild or moderate/severe clinical course and
mild chronic allergic rhinitis with evidence of strength
of recommendation A [1, 7]. Antihistamines are also
a component of therapy of chronic allergic rhinitis of
moderate/severe clinical course as an add-on drug to
nasal glucocorticosteroids [7]. The second generation
antihistamines could also be administered in paediatric
patients over 12 years old — in combination with nasal
glucocorticosteroids [65].

Urticaria

 

In light of two current consensuses of combined
groups of experts from several organizations (EAACI,
Ga?LEN, EDF, WAO and/or UNEV), each case of urticaria
in children should be treated with modern second generation antihistamines (strong recommendation, high
strength of evidence), and in chronic urticaria they are
even the drugs of choice [14, 66]. When clinical symptoms remain for over 2 weeks, the second generation
antihistamines should be administered in a two-to-four
times higher dose. When despite such management the
symptoms still persist, it should be considered to add
a drug from another therapeutic class (as in adults) [14]
or to exchange one antihistamine of the second generation for another [62]. The second generation antihistamines should be administered in the lowest effective
dose but not on demand (strong recommendation, high
strength of evidence) [14].

Food allergy

Antihistamines could immediately reduce clinical symptoms and decrease the severity of the clinical

Advances in Dermatology and Allergology 6, December / 2016

course of some food allergy reactions in children [67].
However, this recommendation is very weak.

Allergic conjunctivitis

There is a reasonable basis to use antihistamines in
e treatment of allergic conjunctivitis in children [68];
owever, there is little reliable evidence of efficacy in this
indication. Despite this, the antihistamines of the first
and the second generations are commonly used by paediatricians in this disease, although as a supplementary
erapy only [69, 70]. The first generation antihistamines
(with sedative and anti-itching activity) could be helpful
in children with sleep disorders due to pruritus and in
severe forms of allergic conjunctivitis [71]. Some antihisamines of the generation reduce skin inflammations,
00 [72].

 

 

 

Anaphylaxis

Antihistamines blocking H1 and/or H2 receptors are
not the drugs of choice in anaphylaxis, and should not be
used in monotherapy [73]. The antihistamines could be
helpful in management of children with anaphylaxis as
a second or third treatment line [74]. The intramuscular
administration of the first generation antihistamines (e.g.
clemastine or antazoline) could be considered — depending
on the response to adrenaline (the first line drug), corticosteroids and salbutamol (the second line treatment) as
well as the recent clinical status of the child [75].

 

 

Primary mast cell activation syndromes

There are no reliable studies in children, especially
with the second generation antihistamines, although
these drugs are used in clinical practice [76].

 

Bilastine in children

As of today, we only have studies regarding pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, safety and tolerability of
bilastine in children. The first trial showed that bilastine
in the dose of 10 mg used in children aged 2-12 gave
the same (equivalent) exposure as the dose of 20 mg in
adults [77]. The second study, in children aged below 12
with allergic rhinoconjunctivitis or with chronic urticaria,
indicated safety and tolerability (similar to placebo) of
bilastine in the dose of 10 mg used for 12 weeks [44].

 

 

Conflict of interest

Piotr Kuna has during the last 3 years received honoraria for participating in advisory board meetings or
giving lectures for the following companies: Adamed,
Allergopharma, AstraZeneca, Berlin Chemie, Boehringer
Ingelheim, Celon Pharma, Chiesi, FAES, Meda, MSD, No
407
P. Kuna, D. Jurkiewicz, M.M. Czarnecka-Operacz, R. Pawliczak, J. Woron, M. Moniuszko, A. Emeryk

 

vartis, Pfizer, Polpharmex, Polpharma, Stallergen, Teva.
Dariusz Jurkiewicz has during the last 3 years received

 

onoraria for participating in advisory board meetings
or giving lectures for the following companies: Adamed,
eva, Berlin-Chemie, Polpharma Magdalena CarneckaOperacz has during the last 3 years received honoraria
or participating in advisory board meetings or giving
ectures for the following companies: Novartis, BerlinChemie, Leo, Meda, Pierre Fabre, Genactive, Allergoharma. Rafat Pawliczak has the conflict of interest that
applies to lecture fees and advisory honoraria paid by
Berlin-Chemie Menarini. Jarostaw Woron has during the
ast 3 years received honoraria for participating in advisory board meetings or giving lectures for the following
companies: Berlin-Chemie/Menarini, MSD. Marcin Moniuszko has the conflict of interest that applies to received
onoraria for participating during last 3 years in advisory
board meetings or giving lectures for the following companies: Boehringer-Ingelheim, Berlin-Chemie/Menarini,
akeda, Symposion. Andrzej Emeryk reported lack of

conflict of interest.

10.

408

. Bous

. Samolifski B, Sybilski AJ, Raciborski F, et a

. Broze

. Horak F, Zieglmayer P, Zieglmayer R, et al. TI

References

Bousquet J, Khaltaev N, Cruz AA, et al. Allergic rhinitis and its
impact on asthma (ARIA) 2008 update (in collaboration with
the World Health Organization, GA(2)LEN and AllerGen).
Allergy 2008; 63: 80-160.

. Bousquet J, Ansotegui |, Canonica GW, et al. Establishing

the place in therapy of bilastine in the treatment of allergic
rhinitis according to ARIA: evidence review. Curr Med Res
Opin 2012; 28: 131-9.

. Kuna P, Bachert C, Nowacki Z, et al. Efficacy and safety of

bilastine 20 mg compared with cetirizine 10 mg and placebo
for the symptomatic treatment of seasonal allergic rhinitis:
a randomized, double-blind, parallel-group study. Clin Exp
Allergy 2009; 39: 1338-47.

. Bachert C, Kuna P, Zuberbier T. Bilastine in allergic rhino
conjuctivitis and urticaria. Allergy 2010; 65 (Suppl 93): 1-13.
uet J, Van Cauwenberge P, Khaltaev N; Aria Workshop
Group; World Health Organization. Allergic rhinitis and its
impact on asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2001; 108 (5 Suppl):
$147-334.

. Prevalence of
rhinitis in Polish population according to the ECAP (Epidemiology of Allergic Disorders in Poland) study. Otolaryngol
Pol 2009; 63: 324-30.
JL, Bousquet J, Baena-Cagnani CE, et al. Allergic Rhinitis and its Impact on Asthma (ARIA) guidelines: 2010 revision. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010; 126: 466-76.

 

. Polskie standardy leczenia niezytow nosa (PoSLeNN).

Stanowisko Panelu Ekspertow Polskiego Towarzystwa Alergologicznego. Medycyna Praktyczna, Krakéw 2013.

e effects of bilastine compared with cetirizine, fexofenadine, and placebo
on allergen-induced nasal and ocular symptoms in patients
exposed to aeroallergen in the Vienna Challenge Chamber.
Inflamm Res 2010; 59: 391-8.

Bachert C, Kuna P, Sanquer F, et al.; Bilastine International
Working Group. Comparison of the efficacy and safety of

 

11.

12.

13.
14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21;

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31

bilastine 20 mg vs desloratadine 5 mg in seasonal allergic
rhinitis patients. Allergy 2009; 64: 158-65.

Sastre J, Mullol J, Valero A, et al. Efficacy and safety of bilastine 20 mg compared with cetirizine 10 mg and placebo
in the treatment of perennial allergic rhinitis. Curr Med Res
Opin 2012; 28: 121-30.

Ferrer M. Immunological events in chronic spontaneous urticaria. Clin Transl Allergy 2015; 5: 30-8.

Zuberbier T. Urticaria. Allergy 2003; 58: 1224-34.

Zuberbier T, Aberer W, Asero R, et al. The EAACI/GA(2)LEN/
EDF/ WAO Guideline for the definition, classification, diagnosis and management of urticaria: the 2013 revision and
update. Allergy 2014; 69: 868-87.

Krause K, Sophor A, Zuberbier T, et al. Up-dosing with bilastine results in improved effectiveness in cold contact urticaria. Allergy 2013; 68: 921-8.

Krause K, Sophor A, Zuberbier T, et al. High dose bilastine is
effective in reducing temperature threshold in cold contact
urticaria. Annual Scientific Meeting of the American College
of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology, Anaheim, Nov 8-13,
2012.

Konstantinou GN, Asero R, Ferrer EF, et al. EAACI taskforce
position paper: evidence for autoimmune urticaria and proposal for defining diagnostic criteria. Allergy 2013; 68: 27-36.
Carter NJ. Bilastine: in allergic rhinitis and urticaria. Drugs
2012; 72: 1257-69.

Church MK, Maurer M, Simons FE, et al. Risk of first-generation H1-antihistamines: a GA(2)LEN position paper. Allergy
2010; 65: 459-66.

Craft TM, Nanden Bussche G, De Cree J, et al. ECG studies
with astemizole. Hum Toxicol 1987; 6: 527-8.

No authors listed. Safety of terfenadine and astemizole. Med
Lett Drugs Ther 1992; 34: 9-10.

Simons FE. H1-receptor antagonists. Comparative tolerability
and safety. Drug Saf 1994; 10: 350-80.

McCue JD. Safety of antihistamines in the treatment of allergic rhinitis in elderly patients. Arch Fam Med 1996; 5: 464-8.
Genovese A, Spadaro G. Highlights in cardiovascular effects
of histamine and H1-receptor antagonists. Allergy 1997; 52
(34 Suppl): 67-78.

Barbey JT, Anderson M, Ciprandi G, et al. Cardiovascular
safety of second-generation antihistamines. Am J Rhinol
1999; 13: 235-43.

Estelle F, Simons R. H1-receptor antagonists: safety issues.
Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 1999; 83: 481-8.
Weissenburger J, Noyer M, Cheymol G, et al. Electrophysiological effects of cetirizine, astemizole and D-sotalol in
a canine model of long QT syndrome. Clin Exp Allergy 1999;
29 (Suppl 3): 190-6.

Yap YG, Camm AJ. The current cardiac safety situation with
antihistamines. Clin Exp Allergy 1999; 29 (Suppl 1): 15-24.
Gupta S, Banfield C, Kantesaria B, et al. Pharmacokinetic
and safety profile of desloratadine and fexofenadine when
coadministered with azithromycin: a randomized, placebocontrolled, parallel-group study. Clin Ther 2001; 23: 451-66.
Yao JA, Du X, Lu D, et al. Estimation of potency of HERG
channel blockers: impact of voltage protocol and temperature. ) Pharmacol Toxicol Methods 2005; 52: 146-53.

. Graff C, Struijk JJ, Kanters JK, et al. Effects of bilastine on

T-wave morphology and the QTc interval: a randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled, thorough QTc study. Clin
Drug Investig 2012; 32: 339-51.

Advances in Dermatology and Allergology 6, December / 2016
The role and choice criteria of antihistamines in allergy management — expert opinion

 

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

Church MK. Safety and efficacy of bilastine: a new H(1)-antihistamine for the treatment of allergic rhinoconjunctivitis
and urticaria. Expert Opin Drug Saf 2011; 10: 779-93.

Conen S, Theunissen EL, Van Oers AC, et al. Acute and subchronic effects of bilastine (20 and 40 mg) and hydroxyzine
(50 mg) on actual driving performance in healthy volunteers.
J Psychopharmacol 2011; 25: 1517-23.

Corcostegui R, Labeaga L, Innerarity A, et al. Preclinical pharmacology of bilastine, a new selective histamine H1 receptor
antagonist: receptor selectivity and in vitro antihistaminic
activity. Drugs R D 2005; 6: 371-84.

Corcostegui R, Labeaga L, Innerarity A, et al. In vivo pharmacological characterisation of bilastine, a potent and selective
histamine H1 receptor antagonist. Drugs R D 2006; 7: 219-31.
Jauregizar N, de la Fuente L, Lucero ML, et al. Pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic modelling of the antihistaminic
(H1) effect of bilastine. Clin Pharmacokinet 2009; 48: 543-54.
Jauregui |, Garcia-Lirio E, Soriano AM, et al. An overview of
the novel H1-antihistamine bilastine in allergic rhinitis and
urticaria. Expert Rev Clin Immunol 2012; 8: 33-41.

Jauregui I, Ramaekers JG, Yanai K, et al. Bilastine: a new antihistamine with an optimal benefit-to-risk ratio for safety
during driving. Expert Opin Drug Saf 1016; 15: 89-98.
Lasseter KC, Sologuren A, La Noce A, et al. Evaluation of the
single-dose pharmacokinetics of bilastine in subjects with
various degrees of renal insufficiency. Clin Drug Investig
2013; 33: 665-73.

Lucero ML, Arteche JK, Sommer EW, et al. Preclinical toxicity
profile of oral bilastine. Drug Chem Toxicol 2012; 35 (Suppl 1):
25-33.

Lucero ML, Gonzalo A, Ganza A, et al. Interactions of bilastine, a new oral H, antihistamine, with human transporter
systems. Drug Chem Toxicol 2012; 35 (Suppl 1): 8-17.

Lucero ML, Gonzalo A, Mumford R, et al. An overview of bilastine metabolism during preclinical investigations. Drug
Chem Toxicol 2012; 35 (Suppl 1): 18-24.

Mosges R, Lip Yen Lee D, Abong J, et al. Role of bilastine in
the management of allergic rhinitis and urticaria: an AsiaPacific consensus statement. Asia Pac Allergy 2016; 6: 56-66.
Novak Z, Yanez A, Kiss |, et al. Safety and tolerability of bilastine 10 mg administered for 12 weeks in children with
allergic diseases. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2016; 27: 493-8.
De Sutter Al, Saraswat A, van Driel ML. Antihistamines for
the common cold. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015; 11:
CD009345.

Helwig/Otto Arzneimittel. Ein Hundbuch fur Arzte und Apotheker. Der Deutsche Apotheker Verlag. Stuttgart, Deutschland 2011.

Bachert C, Maurer M. Safety and efficacy of desloratadine in
subjects with seasonal allergic rhinitis and chronic urticaria:
results of four postmarketing surveillance studies. Clin Drug
Invest 2010; 30: 109-22.

Agrawal DK. Pharmacology and clinical efficacy of desloratadine as an anti-allergic and anti-inflammatory drug. Exp
Opin Investig Drugs 2001; 10: 547-60.

Verster J, Pandi-Perumal SR, Ramaekers JG, et al. Drugs, driving and traffic safety. Birkhauser. Verlag, Switzerland 2009.
Choe JY. Drug Actions and Interactions. McGraw-Hill. New
York, USA 2011.

Wells BG, DiPiro JT, Schwinghammer TL, et al. Pharmacotherapy handbook. McGraw-Hill, New York, USA 2015.
Hutchinson LC, Sleeper RB. Fundamentals of geriatric pharmacotherapy. ASHP Publications, Bethesda, USA 2015.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

Tis

Advances in Dermatology and Allergology 6, December / 2016

Bazire S. Psychotropic drug directory 2014. Lloyd-Reinhold
Communications. Dorsington, UK 2014.

Hochadel MA. Mosby’s drug reference for health professions. Elsevier, St. Louis, USA 2016.

Kuna P, Kruszewski J, Rogala B. Terapia anty-IgE. In: Standardy w alergologii. Vol. |. Kruszewski J, Kowalski ML. Medycyna
Praktyczna, Krakow 2010; 175-90.

Rodrigo GJ, Neffen H, Castro-Rodriguez JA. Efficacy and
safety of subcutaneous omalizumab vs placebo as add-on
therapy to corticosteroids for children and adults with asthma: a systematic review. Chest 2011; 139: 28-35.
Braunstahl GJ, Chlumsky J, Peachey G, et al. Reduction in
oral corticosteroid use in patients receiving omalizumab for
allergic asthma in the real-world setting. Allergy Asthma Clin
Immunol 2013; 9: 47.

Babu KS, Polosa R, Morjaria JB. Anti-IgE — emerging opportunities for omalizumab. Expert Opin Biol Ther 2013; 13:
765-77.

Fitzsimons R, van der Poel LA, Thornhill W, et al. Antihistamine use in children. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed 2015;
100: 122-31.

Emeryk A, Leki przeciwhistaminowe w chorobach alergicznych — co jest wazne dla lekarza i pacjenta? Alergia 2009;
1; 29-32.

Emeryk A. Leki przeciwhistaminowe u dzieci. Alergia 2010;
2: 11-4.

Simons FE, Simons KJ. Histamine and H1-antihistamines:
celebrating a century of progress. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2011; 128: 1139-50.

Schad CA, Skoner DP Antihistamines in the pediatric population: achieving optimal outcomes when treating seasonal
allergic rhinitis and chronic urticaria. Allergy Asthma Proc
2008; 29: 7-13.

de Benedictis FM, de Benedictis D, Canonica GW. New oral
H1 antihistamines in children: facts and unmeet needs.
Allergy 2008; 63: 1395-404.

Carr W, Berstein J, Lieberman P, et al. A novel intranasal
therapy of azelastine with fluticasone for the treatment of
allergic rhinitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2012; 129: 1282-9.
Magerl M, Altrichter S, Borzova E, et al. The definition, diagnostic testing, and management of chronic inducible
urticarias — The EAACI/GA(2)LEN/EDF/UNEV consensus
recommendations 2016 update and revision. Allergy 2016;
71: 780-802.

de Silva D, Geromi M, Panesar SS, et al. Acute and longterm management of food allergy: systematic review. Allergy
2014; 69: 159-67.

Silny W, Glifski W, Czarnecka-Operacz M, et al. Leki przeciwhistaminowe w terapii dermatologicznej. W: Gérski PR
Leki przeciwhistaminowe. Zastosowanie w praktyce medycznej. Wydanie Il. The UCB Institute of Allergy. Bruksela,
Belgia 2005; 101-21.

van Zuuren EJ, Apfelbacher CJ, Fedorowicz Z, et al. No high
level evidence to support the use of oral H1 antihistamines
as monotherapy for eczema: a summary of a Cochrane systematic review. Syst Rev 2014; 3: 25.

Darsow U, Wollenberg A, Simon D, et al. ETFAD/EADV eczema task force 2009 position paper on diagnosis and treatment of atopic dermatitis. ) Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
2010; 24: 317-28.

Akdis CA, Akdis M, Bieber T, et al.; European Academy of Allergology and Clinical Immunology/American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology/PRACTALL Consensus Group.
Diagnosis and treatment of atopic dermatitis in children and

409
P. Kuna, D. Jurkiewicz, M.M. Czarnecka-Operacz, R. Pawliczak, J. Woron, M. Moniuszko, A. Emeryk

 

adults: European Academy of Allergology and Clinical Immunology/American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology/PRACTALL consensus report. Allergy 2006; 61: 969-87.

72. Wollenberg A, Oranje A, Deleuran M, et al. ETFAD/EADV
Eczema task force 2015 position paper on diagnosis and treatment of atopic dermatitis in adult and paediatric patients.
J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 2016; 30: 729-47.

73. Simonds FE, Ardusso LR, Bilo MB, et al. International consensus on (ICON) anaphylaxis. World Allergy Organ J 2014; 7: 9.

74. Simons FE, Ebisawa M, Sanchez-Borges M, et al. 2015 update of the evidence base: World Allergy Organization anaphylaxis guidelines. World Allergy Organ J 2015; 8: 32.

75. Muraro A, Roberts G, Clark P, et al. The management of
anaphylaxis in childhood: position paper of the European
Academy of Allergology and Clinical Immunology. Allergy
2007; 62: 857-71.

76. Nurmatov UB, Rhatigan E, Simons FE, et al. Hl-antihistamines for primary mast cell activation syndromes: a systematic review. Allergy 2015; 70: 1052-61.

77. Wahn U, Valiente R, Vozmediano V, et al. 10 mg of oral bilastine in 2 to 11 years old children has similar exposure
to the adult therapeutic dose (20 mg). Accepted Abstract.
Pediatric Allergy and Asthma Meeting. 15-17 October 2015,
Berlin, Germany.

410 Advances in Dermatology and Allergology 6, December / 2016
