REVIEW

Eur ANN ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL VoL 50, N 1, 5-9, 2018

 

M. SANCHEz-Borces!”, A. CapRILes-Hutett!, EF CaBALLERO-FONSECA!, L. GONZALEZ-AVELEDO*

Biomarkers of treatment efficacy in patients
with chronic spontaneous urticaria

‘Allergy and Clinical Immunology Department, Centro Medico Docente La Trinidad, Caracas, Venezuela
“Allergy Service, Clinica El Avila, Caracas, Venezuela

3Allergy Service, Centro Médico de Caracas, Caracas, Venezuela

‘Dermatology Service, Centro Médico de Caracas, Caracas, Venezuela

KeEy worps

antihistamines; biomarkers; chronic
urticaria; cyclosporine; omalizumab

Corresponding author

Mario Sanchez-Borges

Clinica El Avila, 6a transversal Urb. Altamira
piso 8, consultorio 803

Caracas 1060, Venezuela

Phone: +58 212 2615 284

Fax: +58 212 2615 284

E-mail: sanchezbmario@gmail.com

Doi
10.23822/EurAnnACI.1764-1489.24

Introduction

Summary

Background. Currently there are no biomarkers useful to predict the future evolution and the
therapeutic response in patients with chronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU). Objective. To review
the available information on biomarkers that might be applied for the follow up of the response
to guideline recommended therapies for CSU. Methods. A review of the medical literature on
CSU potential clinical and laboratory biomarkers in PubMed and MEDLINE including the
terms urticaria, chronic urticaria, chronic idiopathic urticaria, chronic Spontaneous urticaria,
antihistamines (AHs), omalizumab (OMA), cyclosporine (CyA), and treatment. Results. Clinical manifestations that were associated to poor responses to AHs were atopy, asthma, rhinitis /
rhinosinusitis, thyroid disease, hypertension, higher disease activity and duration. Laboratory
markers of. ‘AH resistance that have been reported include Complement C5a fraction, Autologous Serum Skin Test (ASST), Basophil Activation Test (BAT), D-dimer and LCN2 adipokine.
Basophil Histamine Release Assay (BHRA), ASST, and basophil CD203c-upregulating activity
in the serum correlated with favorable response to OMA, whereas disease duration and severity,
BAT, BHRA, and D-dimer levels were associated with better responses to CyA. Conclusion.
Some promising biomarkers useful for ‘patient management in CSU, have been identified in the
literature. There is, however, an urgent need of new, easy-to-perform markers that can be made

widely available for the optimal care of patients suffering CSU.

When a new patient suffering CSU is diagnosed, it would be
important for the treating physician to have available clinical

Chronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU) is a highly prevalent conition affecting 0.3 to 0.6% of the population (1,2). Although
currently CSU is regarded as a systemic inflammatory disease,
its pathogenesis is not completely understood (3). In consequence, treatment recommendations ate in general oriented to
the control and prevention of symptoms and exacerbations (4).
Current international guidelines recommend a 3-step system,
beginning with second generation, non-sedating antihistamines
at conventional doses, followed by increased doses up to 4 times
if there is no response after 2 weeks. For patients who do not respond to antihistamines, a third line therapy consists of adding
omalizumab, cyclosporine or montelukast (4).

 

biomarkers, useful to predict the future evolution of the disease
and the most likely response to the treatment. A previous article
from our institutions presented a summary of the clinical and
laboratory markers that have been proposed for the assessment
of the severity of CSU (5). The present article reviews the information currently available on biomarkers that could be utilized
to identify who are the patients more suitable for a particular
form of treatment. We have to mention that in this literature
search, we did not find adequate investigations dealing with
clinical or complementary markers associated to a favorable or

negative response to corticosteroids.
6 M. Sanchez-Borges, A. Capriles-Hulett, FE. Caballero-Fonseca, L. Gonzalez-Aveledo

 

Methods

A review of the medical literature was performed on PubMed
and MEDLINE, including the terms urticaria, chronic urticaria, chronic idiopathic urticaria, chronic spontaneous urticaria,
antihistamines, omalizumab, cyclosporine, and treatment. All
reference types were included in the search.

Results

Therapeutic guidelines for chronic spontaneous urticaria

Current international guidelines for the management of urticaria and angioedema recommend therapy with conventional or
increased doses of second generation antihistamines (AHs) for
patients with chronic urticaria (CU) (4).

Although the definition of antihistamine-resistant urticaria, as
given in the guidelines, is “urticaria which is not controlled after
updosing of non-sedating AHs up to 4 times the usual dose”
(4), other investigators have used their own definitions. For example, the following have been proposed: “steroid dependent
rash poorly responsive to multiple AHs and immunosuppressive
agents” (6), “patients not responding to 10 mg cetirizine per day
for 1 week” (7), or “those on 5 mg of levocetirizine or 10 mg of
cetirizine twice a day for 15 days and a combination of fexofenadine 180 mg and hydroxyzine 25 mg for another 15 days without > 50% reduction of baseline urticaria activity scores” (8).
Between 40 and 65% of patients with CSU do not respond
to the treatment with AHs even at doses 4 times higher than
the approved ones (9). Patients refractory to increased doses of
H1 receptor antagonists require the addition or substitution
of alternative agents, being corticosteroids, cyclosporine and
omalizumab more efficacious than others, such as H2-receptor antagonists, leukotriene antagonists, hydroxychloroquine,
dapsone, colchicine, and sulfasalazine. Long term use of corticosteroids is discouraged due to safety concerns, while they
are recommended exclusively for short periods of time during
disease exacerbations.

Biomarkers of response to antihistamines

Nonsedating AHs are the first line of therapy for the control of
symptoms in patients with CSU (4). As mentioned, for patients
who do not respond to approved doses, the recommendation is
to administer increased doses of second generation AHs. This is
based on controlled studies showing better efficacy (and acceptable tolerance) of higher doses over the usual doses, and also its
superiority when compared to the combination of two different
AHs (4,10,11). However, updosing antihistamine to obtain a
better control of CSU is not always successful (12).

Insufficient response to treatment is a defining feature of severe
CSU. In general, there is scarce information on the factors that
may predict a favorable therapeutic response. In a recent study,
it was reported that antihistamine-resistant CU was associated to
other clinical indicators of severity, including atopic asthma, rhinitis and rhinosinusitis, thyroid disease and hypertension (13).
Another investigation showed that antihistamine-resistant CU
shows increased complement C5a fraction in the serum, higher
disease activity, longer duration of wheals and higher positivity
of the autologous serum skin test (ASST) (14). According to
Staubach and coworkers, and to Ye and coworkers ASST and
Basophil Activation Test (BAT) positivity is associated with
a poor response to antihistamine treatment in patients with
CU (15,16). However, the usefulness of ASST to predict the
response to treatment with AHs and corticosteroids has been
challenged by Belot and coworkers, who proposed that ASST
results do not have bearing on the treatment and are not associated with greater resistance to antihistamine treatment (17).
In a different approach, Asero has proposed that elevated D-dimer plasma levels should be considered a marker of antihistamine-resistant CU (18). Plasma D-dimer levels were elevated
in 0 of 41 patients (0%) showing an “excellent” response to
cetirizine, 3 of 14 (21%) patients showing a “good” response,
3 of 5 (60%) patients showing a “partial” response, 18 of 23
(78%) patients showing a “poor” response, and 7 of 8 (88%)
non-responders. On comparing patients with a disease of similar severity showing either normal or elevated D-dimer levels,
it turned out that the latter were much more frequently cetirizine-resistant.

We found no published evidence that failure to respond to treatment in adult CSU patients is linked to long disease duration.
In children with CSU, remission rates of patients who respond
to standard dosed antihistamine treatment are reportedly higher
than those of patients who require high-dose antihistamine or
combination medications, indicating that urticaria controlled
by a standard dose of antihistamine may predict a shorter time
to remission in the pediatric CSU population. The mean duration of disease at the first visit in the non-remission group was
higher than in the remission group, at the end of the study (19).
An imbalance in pro- and anti-inflammatory adipokines in CU
patients has been recently observed by Trinh and coworkers.
Mean levels of serum Lipocalin-2 (LCN2), TNF-a, IL-6, and
IL-10 were significantly higher in CU patients than in controls,
whereas adiponectin levels were significantly lower in patients
with CU than in controls. While serum IL-6 levels were significantly higher in refractory CU patients, compared. to responsive
CU individuals, LCN2 showed a direct relationship with the
Urticaria Activity Score (UAS). Authors suggested that LCN2
could be a differential marker for disease activity and the clinical
responses to antihistamine treatment in CU patients (20).
Biomarkers of treatment efficacy in patients with chronic spontaneous urticaria 7

 

 

Table I - Biomarkers of antihistamine resistance in chronic spontaneous urticaria.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Clinical References _ Laboratory References
asthma 13 complement C5a fraction 14
rhinitis / rhinosinusitis 13,21 positivity of the autologous serum skin tests (ASST) 14-16
thyroid disease 13 basophil activation test 15,16
hypertension 13 D-dimer 18
higher disease activity 14 LCN2 adipokine 19
longer duration of wheals 14,15

atopy 21

 

According to one study from Taiwan, the presence of atopy and
allergic rhinitis is associated with a poor therapeutic response to
second. generation antihistamines, since non-responders tended to have atopy, especially allergic rhinitis (21). Potential biomarkers of response to AHs are presented in Table I.

Biomarkers of response to omalizumab

The efficacy and safety of recombinant monoclonal anti-human
IgE (omalizumab) in the treatment of chronic urticaria was
clearly established in various seminal studies (22-24). Recent
investigations have tried to identify possible markers of response
to omalizumab (Table II).

According to Gericke et al., there are significant correlations
between a positive Basophil Histamine Release Assay (BHRA)
and ASST and the time to symptom relief with omalizumab.
The fact that a positive BHRA is predictive of a slow response
to omalizumab, suggests that omalizumab works via reducing
FceRI expression in these patients (25).

In a second study that investigated markers of the response to
omalizumab, Palacios et al. reported that the lack of basophil
CD203c-upregulating activity in the serum of patients with CU
correlates with the clinical response to this monoclonal anti-IgE

antibody (26).

 

Table II - Biomarkers of omalizumab effectiveness in chronic spontaneous urticaria.

 

 

 

Laboratory References
basophil histamine release assay (BHRA) 25
ASST 25

 

lack of basophil CD203c-upregulating activity 26

in the serum

 

D-dimer plasma levels 29

It has been reported that serum IL-31 levels of patients with CSU
are significantly higher than in healthy controls (27). A recent
investigation reported that omalizumab, but not placebo, significantly reduced IL-31 levels of patients with CSU. Nevertheless,
no correlation between IL-31 and urticaria activity score, wheal,
or itch scores were present (28). From those results authors concluded that the functional relationship of IL-31 to the pathogenesis and symptom severity of CSU remains to be clarified.

New data from Asero and coworkers has demonstrated that
D-dimer plasma levels parallel the clinical response to omali
zumab (29).
Biomarkers of response to cyclosporine

The second alternative drug that has been shown to be effective for patients with treatment-resistant CSU is cyclosporine
A (30-32).

Although effective, due to its nephrotoxicity it is advised that
this medication is managed under the supervision of specialists
experienced in its use.

Patients with CSU with positive BAT results respond better to
cyclosporine treatment than those with negative BAT results (30).
This finding was further supported by Iqbal’s paper, who reported that in patients treated with cyclosporine, a positive BHRA
indicated a higher probability of response (33). Furthermore,

 

Table III - Biomarkers of cyclosporine effectiveness in chronic spontaneous urticaria.

 

 

 

 

Clinical References Laboratory References

disease duration 33 BAT 27

initial severity 33 BHRA 31
D-dimer 33,34

 
8 M. Sanchez-Borges, A. Capriles-Hulett, FE. Caballero-Fonseca, L. Gonzalez-Aveledo

 

shorter duration of the disease and higher initial severity predict
a successful response to treatment with cyclosporine (34).

Baseline D-dimer levels show a highly significant negative correlation with the response to cyclosporine. (35). Other authors
have postulated that baseline D-dimer is a good marker of disease activity in most patients with CSU, and may be useful to
monitor the clinical response to cyclosporine treatment (36)

(Table III).

Conclusions

Due to the scarcity of published investigations, few markers are
currently available for predicting the response to treatment in
patients with CSU. However, some clinical features, such as
disease activity and duration as well as laboratory markers that
include BAT, BHRA, ASST, and D-dimer, are potentially useful
for such purposes. Additional studies that provide easy to perform and widely available markers are needed in order to deliver
a better care for CSU patients.

Conflict of interest

M. Sdnchez-Borges has received honorary for lecturing from
Novartis Pharma AG. EF. Caballero-Fonseca has received speaker honorary from Sanofi Aventis. A. Capriles-Hulett and L.
Gonzalez-Aveledo declare that they do not have conflicts of interest.

Funding
This work was supported by investigator's funds.

References

1. Zuberbier T, Balke M, Worm M, Edenharter G, Maurer M. Epidemiology of urticaria: a representative cross-sectional population
survey. Clin Exp Dermatol 2010; 35(8):869-73.

2. Gaig P, Olona M, Mufioz Lejarazu D, Caballero MT, Dominguez
FJ, Echechipia S, Garcia Abujeta JL, Gonzalo MA, Lleonart R,
Martinez Cécera C, Rodriguez A, Ferrer M. Epidemiology of urticaria in Spain. J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol 2004; 14:214-20.

3. Sdnchez-Borges M, Asero R, Ansotegui IJ, Baiardini I, Bernstein
JA, Canonica GW, Gower R, Kahn DA, Kaplan AP, Katelaris C,
Maurer M, Park HS, Potter P, Saini S, Tassinari P, Tedeschi A, Ye
YM, Zuberbier T; WAO Scientific and Clinical Issues Council. Diagnosis and treatment of urticaria and angioedema: a worldwide
perspective. World Allergy Organ J 2012; 5:125-47.

4. Zuberbier T, Aberer W, Asero R, Bindslev-Jensen C, Brzoza Z, Canonica GW, Church MK, Ensina LE, Giménez-Arnau A, Godse
K, Gongalo M, Grattan C, Hebert J, Hide M, Kaplan A, Kapp A,
Abdul Latiff AH, Mathelier-Fusade P, Metz M, Nast A, Saini SS,
Sanchez-Borges M, Schmid-Grendelmeier P, Simons FE, Staubach
P, Sussman G, Toubi E, Vena GA, Wedi B, Zhu XJ, Maurer M;
European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology; Global
Allergy and Asthma European Network; European Dermatology

 

 

10.

I.

2.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

Forum; World Allergy Organization. The EAACI / GA(2)LEN /
EDF / WAO Guideline for the definition, classification, diagnosis,
and management of urticaria: the 2013 revision and update. Allergy 2014; 69:868-87.

Sanchez-Borges M, Caballero-Fonseca FE, Capriles-Hulett A,
Gonzalez-Aveledo L, Maurer M. Factors linked to disease severity
and time to remission in patients with chronic spontaneous urticaria. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 2017 (in press).

Pérez A, Woods A, Grattan CE. Methotrexate: A useful steroid-sparing agent in recalcitrant chronic urticaria. Br J Dermatol
2010; 162:191-4.

Okubo Y, Shigoka Y, Yamazaki M, Tsuboi R. Double dose of cetirizine hydrochloride is effective for patients with urticaria resistant: A prospective, randomized, non-blinded, comparative clinical study and assessment of quality of life. J Dermatol Treat 2013;
24:153-60.

Sharma VK, Singh S, Ramam M, Kumawat M, Kumar R. A randomized placebo-controlled double-blind pilot study of methotrexate in the treatment of H1 antihistamine-resistant chronic spontaneous urticaria. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol 2014; 80:112-8.
Kaplan AP. Treatment of chronic spontaneous urticaria. Allergy
Asthma Immunol Res 2012; 4:326-33.

Sanchez-Borges M, Caballero-Fonseca F, Capriles-Hulett A. Treatment of recalcitrant chronic urticaria with nonsedating antihistamines: is there evidence for updosing? J Investig Allergol Clin
Immunol. 2013; 23:141-4.

Sanchez-Borges M, Ansotegui I, Jimenez JM, Rojo MI, Serrano
C, Yafiez A. Comparative efficacy of non-sedating antihistamine
updosing in patients with chronic urticaria. World Allergy Organ
J 2014; 7(1):33.

Asero R. Chronic unremitting urticaria: is the use of antihistamines above the licensed dose effective? A preliminary study of
cetirizine at licensed and above-licensed doses. Clin Exp Dermatol
2007; 32:34-8.

Sanchez-Borges M, Tassinari S, Flores A. Epidemiologic features in
patients with antihistamine-resistant chronic urticaria. Rev Alergia
Mex 2015; 62:279-86.

Huilan Z, Bihua L, Runxiang L, Jiayan L, Luyang L, Zhenjie L.
Features of antihistamine-resistant chronic urticaria and chronic
urticaria during exacerbation. Indian J Dermatol 2015; 60:323.
Staubach P, Onnen K, Vonend A, Metz M, Siebenhaar
Tschentscher I, Opper B, Magerl M, Liidtke R, Kromminga A,
Maurer M. Autologous whole blood injections to patients with
chronic urticaria and a positive autologous serum skin test: A placebo-controlled trial. Dermatology 2006; 212:150-9.

Ye YM, Park JW, Kim SH, Ban GY, Kim JH, Shin YS, Lee HY,
Park HS on behalf of the PRANA Group. Prognostic Factors for
Chronic Spontaneous Urticaria: A 6-Month Prospective Observational Study. Allergy Asthma Immunol Res 2016; 8:115-23.

Bélot V, Desbois I, Martin L, Valat C, Lorette G, Machet L. Assessment of the usefulness of autologous serum skin testing in chronic
urticaria: A retrospective single-centre study of 74 patients. Ann
Dermatol Venereol 2010; 137:444-50.

Asero R. D-dimer: A biomarker for antihistamine-resistant chronic
urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013; 132:983-6.

Eser I, Yologlu N, Baydemir C, Aydogan M. The predictive factors
for remission of chronic spontaneous urticaria in childhood: Outcome from a prospective study. Allergol Immunopathol (Madr)
2016 Jul 28. Pii: $0301-0546(16)30073-8.

 

 
Biomarkers of treatment efficacy in patients with chronic spontaneous urticaria 9

 

20.

21.

22,

23.

24.

25;

26.

27.

Trinh HKT, Ban G-Y, - Lee H-Y, - Park H-S, Ye-M. Altered Systemic Adipokines in Patients with Chronic Urticaria. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 2016; 171:102-10.

Lee HC, Hong JB, Chu CY. Chronic idiopathic urticaria in Taiwan: A clinical study of demographics, aggravating factors, laboratory findings, serum autoreactivity and treatment response. J
Formos Med Assoc 2011; 110:175-82.

Kaplan A, Ledford D, Ashby M, Canvin J, Zazzali JL, Conner E, et
al. Omalizumab in patients with symptomatic chronic idiopathic/
spontaneous urticaria despite standard combination therapy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013; 132:101-9.

Maurer M, Rosén K M.D., Hsieh HJ, Saini S, Grattan C, Gimenéz-Arnau A, Agarwal S, Doyle R, Canvin J, Kaplan A, Casale
T. Omalizumab for the Treatment of Chronic Idiopathic or Spontaneous Urticaria. N Engl J Med 2013; 368:924-93.

Saini SS, Bindslev-Jensen C, Maurer M, Grob JJ, Biilbiil Basken
E, Bradley MS, et al. Efficacy and safety of omalizumab in patients
with chronic idiopathic / spontaneous urticaria who remain symptomatic on H1 antihistamines: a randomized, placebo-controlled
study. J Invest Dermatol 2015; 135:925.

Gericke J, Metz M, Ohanyan T, Weller K, Altrichter S, Skov PS,
Falkencrone S, Brand J, Kromminga A, Hawro T, Church MK,
Maurer M. Serum autoreactivity predicts time to response to omalizumab therapy in chronic spontaneous urticaria. J Allergy Clin
Immunol Pract 2016; 4:529-30.

Palacios T, Stillman L, Borish L, Lawrence M. Lack of basophil
CD203c-upregulating activity as an immunological marker to predict response to treatment with Omalizumab in patients with symptomatic chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 2015; Dec
24. Doi: 10.1016/j.jaip. 2015.11.025. (Epub ahead of print).

Raap U, Wieczorek D, Gehring M, et al. Increased levels of serum IL-31 in chronic spontaneous urticaria. Exp Dermatol 2010;

19:464-6.

 

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34,

35.

36.

Altrichter $, Hawro T, Hanel K, Czaja K, Luscher B, Maurer
M, Church MK, Baron JM. Successful omalizumab treatment
in chronic spontaneous urticaria is associated with lowering
of serum IL-31 levels. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 2016;
30:454-5.

Asero R, Marzano AV, Ferrucci S, Cugno M. D-Dimer plasma levels parallel the clinical response to omalizumab in patients with
severe chronic spontaneous urticaria. Int Arch Allergy Immunol
2017; 172:40-4.

Grattan CE, O’Donnell BE, Francis DM, Niimi N, Barlow RJ,
Seed PT, Kobza Black A, Greaves MW. Randomized double-blind
study of cyclosporin in chronic ‘idiopathic’ urticaria. Br J Dermatol. 2000; 143:365-72.

Vena GA, Cassano N, Colombo D, Peruzzi E, Pigatto P; Neo-I-30
Study Group. Cyclosporine in chronic idiopathic urticaria: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2006; 55:705-9.

Doshi DR, Weinberger MM. Experience with cyclosporine in
children with chronic idiopathic urticaria. Pediatr Dermatol 2009;
26:409-13.

Iqbal K, Bhargava K, Skov PS, Falkencrone S, Grattan CE. A positive serum basophil histamine release assay is a marker for cyclosporine-responsiveness in patients with chronic spontaneous urticarial. Clin Transl Allergy 2012; 2:19.

Hollander SM, Joo SS, Wedner HJ. Factors that predict the success
of cyclosporine treatment for chronic urticaria. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2011; 107:523-8.

Asero R. Plasma D-dimer levels and clinical response to cyclosporine in severe chronic spontaneous urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015; 135:1401-3.

Baek YS, Jeon J, Kim JH, Oh CH. Severity of acute and chronic
urticaria correlates with D-dimer level, but not C-reactive protein

or total IgE. Clin Exp Dermatol 2014; 39: 795-800.

 
