 

THERAPEUTICS

DOI 10.1111/).1365-2133.2005.07049.x

Levocetirizine in the treatment of chronic idiopathic
urticaria: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled

study

E. Nettis, M.C. Colanardi, L. Barra, A. Ferrannini, A. Vacca and A. Tursi

Department of Medical Clinics, Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Section of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of Bari, Piazza Giulio Cesare,

70124 Bari, Italy

Summary

 

Correspondence
Eustachio Nettis.

E-mail: e.nettis@allergy.uniba.it

Accepted for publication
16 June 2005

Key words
chronic idiopathic urticaria, levocetirizine, placebo
controlled study, randomized controlled trial

Conflicts of interest
None declared.

Background Chronic urticaria is a common skin condition. It is frequently a disabling disease because of the persistence of clinical symptoms, the unpredictable
course and its negative influence on the quality of life.

Objectives To determine whether levocetirizine is efficacious in the treatment of
chronic idiopathic urticaria.

Methods A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study was conducted in
106 patients with a diagnosis of chronic idiopathic urticaria. A 1-week single

=u

ind placebo run-in period (baseline) was followed by a 6-week double blind
active treatment period. The patients were randomized to receive one of the following treatments once daily: (a) oral levocetirizine 5 mg, or (b) oral placebo.
The study ended after another 1-week single blind placebo washout period.

Results The evaluable population consisted of 100 patients. Levocetirizine administered once daily is effective and well tolerated in the treatment of the symptoms

 

 

of chronic idiopathic urticaria and in improving the patient’s quality of life.
Levocetirizine was superior to placebo in reducing the mean total symptoms
score as well as individual symptoms, the number of daily episodes and the
number of weals, the overall severity of symptoms and the quality of life. The
significant beneficial effects of levocetirizine lasted only during the active trial,
while at follow-up there was a significant worsening of all the variables evaluated
in this study, after the end of the active trial (week 7).

Conclusions A global assessment indicates that levocetirizine 5 mg once daily is an
effective agent in patients with chronic idiopathic urticaria, as its action provides
a rapid and satisfactory control of the symptoms and measures of subjective disease, although this is limited to the duration of treatment.

 

Levocetirizine is a newly developed selective H1 antagonist;
it is the R-enantiomer or active isomer of the racemate
cetirizine. Its small volume of distribution, smaller even
than that of cetirizine, confers improved safety because of
its lesser passage through the blood-brain barrier and low
cerebral receptor binding.’ Levocetirizine has twice the
affinity for the H1 receptor compared with cetirizine and
its potency as an antihistamine has been demonstrated by
inhibition of histamine-induced weal and flare reactions.”
Previous studies of the action of single doses of 5 mg levocetirizine on histamine-induced skin reactions in healthy
male subjects compared its activity with that of other antihistamines at their therapeutic dosage: ebastine 10 mg, fexofenadine 180 mg, loratadine 10 mg and mizolastine 10 mg

4

and desloratadine.** Assessment of their global anti-H1

activity over 24 h showed that levocetirizine had the greatest activity in suppressing skin reactivity to histamine. In
addition, levocetirizine was superior to the other antihistamines because it induced longer lasting high levels of inhibition.

Gandon and Allain’ assessed the effect of levocetirizine
5 mg after both single and repeated doses, on psychometric
and cognitive functions compared with placebo, using the
critical flicker fusion test. In addition, they evaluated secondary objectives including assessment of effects on a battery of
tests including choice reaction time, body sway, and on learning memory. In addition, subjective perception of mood changes and vigilance were measured. They found that
levocetirizine does not produce any deleterious effect on cog
nitive and psychometric functions compared with placebo.

© 2005 British Association of Dermatologists © British Journal of Dermatology 2006 154, pp533-538 533
534 Levocetirizine in chronic idiopathic urticaria, E. Nettis et al.

The clinical efficacy of levocetirizine has been evaluated in
several studies focusing on allergic rhinitis. In particular, it has
been demonstrated that long-term treatment with this antihistamine (6 months) can improve the quality of life and symptoms and decrease the overall costs of persistent allergic
rhinitis; these are some of the key criteria for the successful
treatment of chronic disease.*

Levocetirizine has proven to be an effective and well-tolerated treatment for allergic rhinitis due to house dust mites
and it was also effective for the relief of nasal congestion.° In
addition, its efficacy in seasonal allergic rhinitis has been
investigated. In patients with this disorder, treatment with levocetirizine produced a significant decrease in sneezing, rhinorrhoea, itching nose and itching eyes in comparison with the
slow changes induced by placebo.” Different studies have
demonstrated that a dose of 5 mg daily has the optimal
benefit/risk ratio in the treatment of allergic rhinitis.”

HI receptor antagonists are considered to be the first line
of treatment for allergic rhinitis, as well as for urticaria. Up to
now, no studies have been conducted to verify the efficacy of
levocetirizine to treat urticaria. The aim of this study is to
determine whether levocetirizine is efficacious in the treatment

of chronic idiopathic urticaria.

Methods

A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study was
conducted in 106 patients with a diagnosis of chronic idiopathic urticaria (67 women and 39 men) ranging in age from
22 to 71 years (mean 40:2 + SD 11:2 years).

Approval for the study was obtained from the Ethics Committee and all patients gave their written informed consent.
Prior to treatment, all patients completed screening; exclusion
criteria were physical urticaria, or urticaria caused by medications, insect bites, food or other known causes, as well as a
history of atopic diseases. Patients with significant concomitant
illness (e.g. malignancies or hepatic, psychiatric, endocrine or

other major systemic diseases) were also excluded.

Study design

The 106 patients were randomly assigned to receive levocetirizine or placebo once daily: Group A (53 patients) oral levocetirizine 5 mg; Group B (53 patients) placebo. They were not
informed that the treatment would be divided up into specific
periods. At the beginning of the trial, the tablets were encapsulated in a double-blind fashion, and sealed in envelopes by

Initial visits ¢—» Visit | « » Visit 2¢ » Visit3 <

> Visit 4 ¢

a pharmacist together with the instruction sheets. All treatments were dispensed by a third party. No medications that
could interfere with the clinical evaluations were allowed during the trial.

A 1-week single-blind placebo run-in period (baseline) was
followed by a 6-week double-blind active treatment period
with the above substances. The study ended after another
1-week single-blind placebo washout period.

Apart from the initial screening visits, each patient was
examined by the physician four times over the 8-week period:
a first visit following the placebo run-in; a second visit after
3 weeks of active treatment; a third visit after 6 weeks of active treatment (end of treatment); and a final visit at the end

of the second placebo washout period (follow-up) (Fig. 1).

Efficacy measures

Throughout the study, all patients recorded their symptoms in
a daily diary, including pruritus, size of weals, number of
weals, number of separate urticarial episodes. At each clinical
visit the patient’s diary was reviewed, the patient was interviewed and a physical examination was performed. Evaluations
were made at each visit by the same investigator for each
patient.

Efficacy measures were scored according to the following
scales: pruritus: 0 (none), 1 (mild), 2 (moderate) and 3
(severe); number of weals: 0 (none), 1 (1-10 weals), 2 (11-20
weals), 3 (> 20 weals); size of weals (mean diameter): 0 (no
lesion), 1 (< 1:27 cm), 2 (1:27-2:54 cm), 3 (> 2°54 cm);
number of separate urticarial episodes: 0 (no episodes), |
(1 episode), 2 (2-3 episodes), 3 (> 3 episodes). The maximum
value of the total symptoms score (TSS) was 12. At each clinical
visit, patients also completed a 10-cm visual analogue scale
score (VAS) indicating the overall severity of their urticaria over

the previous days from 0 (none) to 10 (worst).

Urticaria quality of life

At each clinical visit, a five-question urticaria quality of life
(QoL) questionnaire was administered evaluating the following domains: cutaneous symptoms, emotions, practical problems. The questions were: ‘Over the last week, how itchy,
sore, painful or stinging has your skin been? Over the last
week, how embarrassed or self-conscious have you been
because of your skin? Over the last week, how much has
your skin influenced the choice of clothes you wear? Over

the last week, how much has your skin affected any social

> Visit 5

 

(screening) (randomization) (during treatment)

(end of treatment)

 

1 week 3 weeks 3 weeks

 

1 week

 

Placebo

Levocetirizine Smg or placebo,

Run-in once daily

 

 

 

 

Follow-up

 

 

Fig 1. Schematic diagram of the study.

© 2005 British Association of Dermatologists © British Journal of Dermatology 2006 154, pp533-538
or leisure activities? Over the last week, has your skin prevented you from working or studying? If ‘‘No’’, over the
last week how much has your skin been a problem at work
or studying?’. These are part of the Dermatology Quality
Life Index.” Patients scored their response to each question
on a four-point scale ranging from 0 (no problems) to 3

(severe problems).

Safety

Safety and tolerability were assessed on the basis of the
adverse events reported, or changes in vital signs, physical
examination findings, and electrocardiograms recorded before
and after the end of treatment. Laboratory safety parameters
(haematology, serum biochemistry and urine analysis) were

assessed before and after the treatment period.

Statistical analysis

The significance of differences in age, sex, baseline symptoms
severity score, baseline QoL score, baseline duration of urticaria score, and baseline VAS was compared using the t-test for
continuous data and the 7’ test for categorical data.

For the efficacy analyses and comparison of the VAS in each
study group, and at different visits, a repeated measures analysis of variance was performed. To compare the efficacy and
the VAS in the two groups at different visits an analysis of
variance was performed. In all instances, P < 0-05 was consid
ered statistically significant.

Results

The 106 patients were randomized, 53 to treatment with
levocetirizine (36 women and 17 men ranging in age from
22 to 71 years, mean 41:1 + SD 11-8 years); 53 with placebo (32 women and 21 men ranging in age from 22 to
69 years, mean 39 + SD 10:5 years). The two groups were
balanced with respect to baseline demographic data, including patient age and sex, duration of disease, overall symptom severity and perceived QoL. Two patients in the
levocetirizine group and four patients in the placebo group
discontinued treatment during the first study week. The rea(a= 2);

heart attack (n = 1); and the need to take oral corticoster
sons for discontinuation were: noncompliance
oids because of aggravation of the urticaria (n = 3; among
them two came from the placebo group and one from the
levocetirizine group). The evaluable population thus consisted of 100 patients. The patient demographics and baseline

characteristics are shown in Table 1.

Efficacy analysis

At all study visits, patients from the levocetirizine group
reported a significant improvement in overall chronic idiopathic urticaria compared with the placebo group, and this
effect was maintained in the follow-up analysis (P < 0-05).

Levocetirizine in chronic idiopathic urticaria, E. Nettis et al. 535

Table 1 Baseline patients’ data (only patients who completed the
study)

 

 

Patients’ data Levocetirizine Placebo
Sex
Male 17 (33%) 20 (41%)
Female 34 (67%) 29 (59%)
Age (years), mean + SD AT2 E119 369 £107
Symptom severity (overall score)* 9-4 + 1°6 9:3 171
Quality of life (overall score)” 66 +27 62424
Duration of urticaria (months) 174125 989441
Baseline visual analogue scale 87+ 0-9 86+ 10

 

“Mean of four domains scored on 0-3 scale. "Mean of five
domains scored on 0-3 scale.

The mean TSS value decreased by 81% at the end of
therapy with respect to the baseline evaluation in the group
treated with levocetirizine, and by 1% in the group treated
with placebo. At the end of the active treatment, total disappearance of the symptoms was recorded in 27 (53%) vs.
0 patients treated with levocetirizine or placebo, respectively. Controls conducted 1 week after the end of active
treatment showed that the positive effects persisted and
were still statistically significant between the two groups,
although to a lesser degree compared with those obtained
during active therapy. At follow-up, total disappearance of
the symptoms was recorded in 12 (24%) patients treated
with levocetirizine, and in three (6%) patients treated with

placebo.

Number of weals

The treatment group was statistically superior to the placebo
group in terms of reduction of the number of weals score
throughout the trial (P < 0:05). In particular, in the levocetirizine group the drug determined a reduction in the number of
weals score at all visits except follow-up, when the score was
higher than the one reported at week 7.

During the six active treatment weeks levocetirizine therapy
produced a 79% reduction in the score for number of weals
compared with baseline (P < 0:05). At follow-up, the reduction in number of weals score compared with baseline was
58% in the treatment group (P < 0-05), although there was
significant worsening with respect to the score at the end of
active treatment (P < 0-05). In the placebo group there were
only slight, not significant, changes in the scores for number

of weals during the trial.

Number of separate urticarial episodes

The levocetirizine group was statistically superior to the placebo group in terms of the reduction of the number of urticarial episodes scores throughout the trial (P < 0°05).

During the first three active treatment weeks levocetirizine

therapy produced an 84% reduction in the number of separate

© 2005 British Association of Dermatologists © British Journal of Dermatology 2006 154, pp533-538
536 Levocetirizine in chronic idiopathic urticaria, E. Nettis et al.

episodes score compared with baseline (P < 0-05). This
marked effect did not persist after the end of the active treatment, and there was a worsening, although not significant, of
the score, with an increase by 33% with respect to the fourth
week of the trial.

At the follow-up visit, again, there was a significant worsening of the score after the end of the active treatment period
(100%; P < 0-05), although this value is significantly lower
than the (— 58%;
P < 0-05). In the placebo group there were only slight, not

corresponding baseline assessment
significant, changes in the scores for the number of urticarial

episodes during the trial.

Size of weals

The treatment group was statistically superior to the placebo
group in terms of reduction in the size of weals. In particular,
in the levocetirizine group the drug determined a reduction in
the score for the size of weals at all visits except follow-up,
when this score was higher than the one reported at week 7.
During the 6 weeks of active treatment levocetirizine therapy produced a 75% reduction in the scores for size of weals
compared with baseline (P < 0:05). At follow-up, the reduction in the score for size of weals compared with baseline was
50% in the treatment group (P < 0:05), although there was a
significant worsening with respect to the end of active treatment score (P < 0-05). In the placebo group there were only
slight, nonsignificant changes in the score for the size of weals

during the trial.

Pruritus

Levocetirizine was statistically superior to placebo in reducing
mean scores for pruritus throughout the trial (P < 0-05). In
particular, in the levocetirizine group the drug determined a
reduction in pruritus intensity at all visits except follow-up,
when the pruritus score was higher than the one reported at
week 7.

At the end of the active treatment, a reduction in pruritus
severity by 85% was recorded compared with baseline in the
levocetirizine group (P < 0:05). At follow-up, the reduction
in pruritus severity compared with baseline was 69% in the
treatment group (P < 0:05). In the placebo group there were
only slight, nonsignificant changes in the pruritus score during
the trial.

Quality of life

There was a significant improvement in overall QoL with
respect to baseline in the levocetirizine group, while in the
placebo group there was a minor, but nonsignificant
improvement. However, in the follow-up assessment there
was a worsening, although nonsignificant, of the QoL evaluation with respect to the end of active treatment. In the
placebo group there were only slight, nonsignificant changes

in the QoL score during the trial.

Visual analogue scale score

There was a significant improvement in the VAS with respect
to baseline in the levocetirizine treatment group, while there
were only slight changes among patients treated with placebo.
Patients in the active treatment group indicated a mean
decrease from baseline of 82% after 3 weeks of active treatment, 87% after 6 weeks and 74% at follow-up (P < 0-05).
In the placebo group there were only slight, nonsignificant

improvements in the VAS during the trial.

Safety

No clinically significant changes in vital signs, laboratory
parameters or electrocardiogram criteria occurred during the
study in any group. No patient reported any side-effects during the course of therapy in any study group.

Discussion

Urticaria is a condition characterized by the development of
itchy, erythematous cutaneous swellings (weals). In particular,
chronic urticaria is characterized by the occurrence of weals
daily or almost daily for a period of at least 6 weeks.'° It is a
fairly common disorder, occurring in at least 0°1% of the population.'' Despite an exhaustive and expensive diagnostic
approach, searches for the aetiology of chronic urticaria are
mostly frustrating, because in most cases the causative agent is
unknown, and a physical urticaria and urticarial vasculitis are
excluded. In these cases a diagnosis of chronic idiopathic urticaria is made.

However, recent research suggests that an autoimmune process may be causal in a significant subpopulation of patients,
featuring the presence of circulating functional autoantibodies
either to the high affinity IgE receptor or to IgE.'*"!?

In any case, the pathogenesis of urticaria involves the
release of a wide array of potential vasoactive mediators that

arise from the activation of mast cells in the skin.'*”'°

Among
them, histamine is released from preformed granules and is
capable of eliciting the classic triple response consisting of
vasodilation (erythema), increased vascular permeability
(oedema), and an axon reflex that increases the extent of the
reaction, particularly the erythema. In addition, various lipidderived vasoactive factors are liberated by mast cells. However,
because the signs and symptoms associated with chronic urticaria are mediated primarily by histamine, antihistamines are
the mainstay of treatment.

Although the disfigurement can be remarkable and the pruritus intense, chronic urticaria is not life-threatening. Nevertheless, the symptoms can cause great misery, including such
symptoms as sleep disruption, fatigue, social isolation, energy
loss and emotional difficulties.'’ This is enhanced by the fact
that the course and duration of chronic urticaria are highly
variable and unpredictable. Spontaneous remissions may often
occur within 12 months, but a substantial number of patients

11,18

may have symptoms years.

lasting periodically for

© 2005 British Association of Dermatologists © British Journal of Dermatology 2006 154, pp533-538
Therefore, the treatment of chronic urticaria should improve
both symptoms and QoL, the latter an important goal in the
management of patients with chronic urticaria.

This is the first study to evaluate the efficacy of 5 mg levocetirizine in the treatment of chronic idiopathic urticaria in a
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. We have demonstrated
that this new antihistamine taken once daily is effective and
well tolerated in the treatment of chronic idiopathic urticaria
symptoms and in improving the patient’s QoL. Levocetirizine
was superior to placebo in reducing the mean TSS as well as
individual symptoms, number of daily episodes and number
of weals, VAS and QoL.

These beneficial effects of levocetirizine appeared during the
first 3 weeks and lasted throughout the duration of the active
trial, showing the excellent ability of the drug to control chronic idiopathic urticaria.

In the placebo group there were only slight variations in
the parameters, that could be attributed to the spontaneous
course of chronic idiopathic urticaria.

Interestingly, focusing attention only on the levocetirizine
group, we could observe that the significant beneficial effects
of this drug lasted only during the active trial, while at
follow-up there was a significant worsening of all the variables
evaluated in this study, with respect to the end of the active
trial (week 7). Notwithstanding this decrease, the condition
was still better than at baseline. At the end of active treatment
urticaria disappeared in 27 (53%) individuals belonging to the
levocetirizine group and in none belonging to the placebo
group. At the end of follow-up, 14 of them (52%) suffered a
relapse of the urticaria.

This could be explained by the fact that antihistamines are
substantially symptomatic agents. Mediators other than histamine, such as the newly generated eicosanoid lipid-derived
mediators, predominantly prostaglandin D, and leukotriene
C4, and preformed mediators, have been suggested to be
important contributory factors in the clinical management of
chronic urticaria and responsible for the late-phase reac
. 19-21
tions.

Hence, chronic idiopathic urticaria should not be
treated with antihistamines alone, but could require specific
agents such as antileukotrienes, as shown in other studies.??~
°’ The underlying complex mechanism could be responsible
for the relapse of symptoms observed at follow-up.

In addition, the efficacy of levocetirizine as a symptomatic
agent has been highlighted by the perfect correlation between
the objective evaluation of chronic urticaria by means of the

26
Breneman scale

and patients’ perception of the disability
referred by means of QoL impairment and VAS (Figs 2 and
3). The QoL issue allows clinicians to assess the extent and
nature of the disability suffered, so that an appropriate management regimen can be implemented. The safety profile of
levocetirizine was excellent in this study, with a complete
absence of adverse events.

In conclusion, a global assessment indicates that levocetirizine 5 mg once daily is an effective agent in patients with
chronic idiopathic urticaria, as its action provides a rapid

and satisfactory control of the symptoms and _ subjective

Levocetirizine in chronic idiopathic urticaria, E. Nettis et al. 537

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10

9

8 7

—e— Efficacy measures

c 7
8 6
& —m-VAS
e 8
a 4
a 3 te Quality of life

5 questionnaite

1

0

1 2 3 4
weeks

 

 

Fig 2. Overall mean symptoms scores, visual analogue scale (VAS)
score and quality of life questionnaire by week of treatment in
levocetirizine group. 1, 2, 3, 4 refer to baseline, after the 3rd and 6th

weeks of active treatment and at follow-up.

CAN woRaanwod

 

 

—e— efficacy measures

—=-_VAS

score,mean

4 quality of life
questionnaire

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 2 3 4
weeks

 

 

Fig 3. Overall mean symptoms scores, visual analogue scale (VAS)
score and quality of life questionnaire by week of treatment in
placebo group. 1, 2, 3, 4 refer to baseline, after the 3rd and 6th

weeks of active treatment and at follow-up.

disease measures, although this is limited to the duration of

treatment.

References

1 Tillement JP. A low distribution volume as a determinant of efficacy and safety for histamine (H1) antagonist. Allergy 1995; 50:12—
16.

2 Devalia JL, de Vos C, Hanotte F, Baltes E. A randomized double
blind crossover comparison among cetirizine, levocetirizine and

UCB 28557 on histamine-induced cutaneous responses in healthy

adult volunteers. Allergy 2001; 56:50-7.

Grant JA, Riethuisen JM, Moulaert B, de Vos C. A double-blind,

randomized, single dose, crossover comparison of levocetirizine

w

with ebastine, fexofenadine, loratadine, mizolastine, and placebo:
suppression of histamine-induced wheal-and-flare response during
24 hours in healthy male subjects. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2002;
88:190-7.
4 Purohit A, Melac M, Pauli G, Frossard N. Twenty-four-hour activity and consistency of activity of levocetirizine and desloratadine
in the skin. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2003; 56:388-94.
Gandon JM, Allain H. Lack of effect of single and repeated doses
of levocetirizine, a new antihistamine drug, on cognitive and

a

psychomotor functions in healthy volunteers. J Clin Pharmacol 2002;
54:51-8.

© 2005 British Association of Dermatologists © British Journal of Dermatology 2006 154, pp533-538
538 Levocetirizine in chronic idiopathic urticaria, E. Nettis et al.

6

11
12

Wedi B, Novacovic V, Koemer M, Kapp A. Chronic urticaria serum
induces histamine release, leukotriene production, and basophil
CD63 surface expression—inhibitory effects of anti-inflammatory
drugs. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2000; 105:552-60.

Salmun LM. Antihistamines in late-phase clinical development for
allergic disease. Expert Opin Invest Drugs 2002; 11:259-73.

Clough GF, Boutsiouki P, Church MK. Comparison of the effects
of levocetirizine and loratadine on histamine-induced wheal, flare,
and itch in human skin. Allergy 2001; 56:985-8.

Finlay AY, Khan GK. Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI)—a
simple practical measure for routine clinical use. Clin Exp Dermatol
1994; 19:210-16.

Grattan C, Powell $, Humphreys F. Management and diagnostic
guidelines for urticaria and angio-oedema. Br J Dematol 2001;
144:708-14.

Greaves MW. Chronic urticaria. N Engl J Med 1995; 332:1767-72.
Nettis E, Dambra P, D’Oronzio L et al. Reactivity to autologous
serum skin test and clinical features in chronic idiopathic urticaria.
Clin Exp Dermatol 2002; 27:29-31.

Sabroe RA, Seed PT, Stat C et al. Chronic idiopathic urticaria: comparison of the clinical features of patients with and without anti-FceRI
or anti-IgE autoantibodies. J Am Acad Dermatol 1999; 40:443-50.
Horan RF, Ascneider LC, Sheffer AL. Allergic skin disorders and
mastocytosis. JAMA 1992; 268:1858-68.

Sabroe RA, Greaves MW. The pathogenesis of chronic idiopathic
urticaria. Arch Dermatol 1997; 133:1003-8.

Greaves MW, Sabroe RA. ABC of allergies: allergy and the skin.
I—urticaria. Br Med J 1998; 316:1147-50.

17

18

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

O'Donnell BF, Lawlor F, Simpson J et al. The impact of chronic
urticaria on the quality of life. Br J Dermatol 1997; 136:197-201.
Greaves M. Chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2000; 105:
664-72.

Schwartz LB. Mast cells and their role in urticaria. J Am Acad Dermatol
1991; 25:190-204.

Henderson WR. The role of leukotrienes in inflammation. Ann Intern
Med 1994; 121:684-97.

Lewis RA, Austen KF, Soberman RJ. Leukotrienes and other
products of the 5-lipoxygenase pathway. Biochemistry and relation to pathobiology in human diseases. N Engl J Med 1990;
323:645—-55.

Nettis E, Colanardi MC, Paradiso MT et al. Desloratadine in combination with montelukast in the treatment of chronic idiopathic urticaria: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Clin
Exp Allergy 2004; 34:1401-7.

Nettis E, Pannofino A, Cavallo E et al. Efficacy of montelukast, in
combination with loratadine, in the treatment of delayed pressure
urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2003; 112:212-13.

Norris GJ, Sullivan TJ. Leukotrienes and cytokines in steroid
dependent urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1998; 101:128 (Abstract).
Bagenstose SE, Levin L, Bernstain JA. The addition of zafirlukast to
cetirizine improves the treatment of chronic urticaria in patients
with positive autologous serum skin test. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2004; 113:134-40.

Breneman D, Bronsky EA, Bruce § et al. Cetirizine and astemizole
therapy for chronic idiopathic urticaria: a double-blind, placebocontrolled comparative trial. J Am Acad Dermatol 1995; 33:192-8.

© 2005 British Association of Dermatologists © British Journal of Dermatology 2006 154, pp533-538
