Chin J Integr Med “1.

Available online at link.springer.com/journal/11655
hinese Journal of Integrative Medicine Journal homepage: www.cjim.cn/zxyjhen/zxyjhen/ch/index.aspx

E-mail: cjim_en@cjim.cn
Original Article

Impact of Jumihaidokuto (Shi-Wei-Bai-Du-Tang) on
Treatment of Chronic Spontaneous Urticaria:
A Randomized Controlled Study

Hiroyuki Murota, Hiroaki Azukizawa, and Ichiro Katayama

ABSTRACT Objective: To study the effect of Jumihaidokuto (Shi-Wei-Bai-Du-Tang, +%%&##) in the
management of chronic spontaneous urticaria. Methods: A randomized two-arm, parallel group study was
conducted to compare the effect of Jumihaidokuto (6 g daily) with a control for 8 weeks. Concomitant therapy
(e.g., antihistamines) was continued. Twenty-one subjects with severe chronic urticaria were enrolled in this
study. The primary treatment outcome was the severity score proposed by the Japanese Dermatological
Association. Secondary outcomes were quality of life (Skindex-16), itch intensity (Visual Analogue Scale), and
patients’ subjective disability due to wheal or itch. After the subjects were randomly assigned to groups by
block randomization, 10 received Jumihaidokuto, and 11 did not. All subjects had already taken antihistamines.
Results: Improvement was significant when comparing the severity score of the Jumihaidokuto group with that
of the control group (P<0.01). Skindex-16 values for both groups gradually decreased in the same fashion.
Conclusion: Concomitant use of Jumihaidokuto with antihistamine was more effective than antihistamine alone in
the management of chronic idiopathic urticaria. (Trial Registration No. UMIN000007251)

KEYWORDS § Jumihaidokuto, crude drug extract, Shiwei Baidu Decoction, Chinese medicine, antihistamine,

chronic spontaneous urticaria, severity, quality of life

Chronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU) is
a common skin disease characterized by the
spontaneous development of wheals with pruritus
that persist for more than 4 weeks." The symptoms
related to CSU significantly impair one's quality of life
(QOL) and work productivity.°* In the management
of CSU, antihistamines are recommended as a firstline treatment and yield satisfactory therapeutic
efficacy."*° If their effects are insufficient, higher
doses of antihistamines, leukotriene antagonists,
and H,-blockers will be applied. If these fail to
resolve the symptoms, an alternative therapy
is immunosuppressive drugs. To address the
pathological mechanism in CSU, antihistamines
play a central role in treatment. Alternative therapies
may be prescribed to improve urticarial diathesis
(e.g., atopic predisposition, autoimmunity, and
bacterial infection).”° However, despite uncertainty
regarding the efficacy of combination treatment, these
alternative therapies are generally used concomitantly
with antihistamines. Although these treatment options
can temporarily suppress symptoms related to CSU,
wheals are easily reactivated by psychological stress,
physical exhaustion, or infectious diseases.”

Prolonged treatment with medications is required
for the management of CSU. A safe and effective
treatment, which can be administered for long
periods of time, should be chosen. A previous study
reported the beneficial therapeutic effect of combining
antihistamine with total glucosides of paeony in the
treatment of chronic urticaria.” This result suggests
that herbal ingredients may be useful as effective
therapeutic options for the treatment of CSU.

Jumihaidokuto (Shi-Wei-Bai-Du-Tang, +
°® ki) is an extract powder comprised of a
mixture of crude drug extracts and is covered by
Japanese insurance for the treatment of the following
symptoms: suppurative dermatosis, acute dermatitis,
urticaria, acute eczema, and tinea pedis. Regarding

 

©The Chinese Journal of Integrated Traditional and Western
Medicine Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2017
Department of Dermatology, Course of Integrated Medicine,
Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka
(575-0871), Japan

Correspondence to: Dr. Hiroyuki Murota, Tel: 81-668793031,
Fax: 81-668793039, E-mail: h-murota@derma.med.osaka-u.
ac.jp

DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s1 1655-01 7-2950-6

a Springer
+Ds

the pharmacological properties of Jumihaidokuto,
5-alpha-reductase inhibition, antioxidant activity, and
enhancement of type-1 macrophage function are
considered the major mechanisms by which dermatitis
is suppressed."°"” A prospective uncontrolled
case series evaluated the efficacy of concomitant
treatment with Jumihaidokuto on the dermatological
symptoms of atopic dermatitis. The results showed
that 12 weeks of treatment significantly decreased
the eruption score (especially for erythema and acute
papules), oozing and crusting, chronic papules,
nodular lichenification, and eruption area." To our
knowledge, there are currently few studies that have
evaluated its clinical efficacy for treating CSU. Thus,
in this study, we evaluated the effects of concomitant
use of Jumihaidokuto with antihistamine on CSU in a
randomized controlled study.

METHODS

Diagnostic, Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria

This study was approved by the Institutional
Ethics Committee (institutional ID 10303-2) and
performed at Osaka University Hospital, Japan.
Subjects who satisfied both the definition of urticaria”
and the following conditions at the initiation of this study
were included. Patients had infesting urticaria for more
than 1 month, were treated with oral antihistamine for
more than 1 month, had a severity score of more than
3 points when assessed by the management guidelines
set by the Japanese Dermatology Association,” were
at least 15 years old, and provided written consent.
Subjects were excluded from the study if they had
any of the following conditions: exhaustion, severe
constipation, concomitantly taking other herbal
medicines or oral corticosteroids in the 4 weeks prior
to enrollment, and complications (e.g., aldosterone,
myopathy, hypocalcemia, renal failure, heart failure,
and pregnancy).

Grouping and Treatment

Subjects were randomly assigned to treatment
groups with or without Jumihaidokuto by block
randomization using random allocation software. The
allocation table was concealed by the person who
created the table and was responsible for allocation;
this person was not involved in the treatment. A
total of 50 subjects were expected to recruit, and
this sample size was based on a previous study
that had compared the effect of ketotifen with and
without herbal medicines on chronic urticaria."® The

Chin J Integr Med

recruitment period was January 16, 2012 to March
31, 2014, and the end of follow-up was April 30,
2014. Finally, 21 subjects were enrolled in this study
(allocation ratio of Jumihaidokuto-treated group:
antihistamine-only group=10:11). Recruitment was
halted before we enrolled the expected number
of subjects because of the study period stated in
the experimental design approved by the ethics
committee. Subjects in the Jumihaidokuto treatment
group were asked to take 3 g Jumihaidokuto (Kracie
Pharma Ltd., Japan, Table 1) just before breakfast and
dinner, in addition to the concomitant antihistamines
for 8 weeks. During the study period, changes in the
medication regimen, such as altering dosage or taking
additional medication (including topical drug), were
prohibited. The trial registry ID is UMIN000007251.

Table 1. Components of Jumihaidokuto
Herb Content (g)

 

Bupleuri radix 2.5
Platycodi radix 2.5
Cnidii rhizoma 2:5
Poria 2.5
Saposhnikoviae radix 2.5
Glycyrrhizae radix 1.5
Zingiberis rhizoma 1.0
Schizonepetae Spica 1.5
Araliae cordatae rhizoma 1.5
Pruni Cortex 2.5

Notes: Each daily dose (6.0 g) of this product contains
3,900 mg of Jumihaidokuto extract powder extracted from the
mixture of the above crude drugs

Evaluation of Treatment Effect

Clinical evaluations were performed at weeks
0, 4, and 8. The primary endpoint of this study was
the severity score for urticaria proposed by the
Japanese Dermatology Association (1: symptom is
not recognized, 2: mild symptoms, 3: tolerable but
uncomfortable, 4: difficult to manage life with the
symptoms, 5: cannot manage a social life, 6: shock
or similar to shock).” Secondary endpoints were the
Skindex-16, visual analogue scale (VAS) for itch (0
cm: no itch, 10 cm: worst itch), a patient questionnaire
about itch and their skin condition (Appendix 1), and
adverse events due to treatment. No changes were
made to trial outcomes after the trial commenced.

Statistical Analysis
Data were expressed as meant standard
Chin J Integr Med

deviation (x+s). The Bonferroni and Steel-Dwass
multiple comparison tests were performed using Startle®
version 3. Statistical analyses using Mann-Whitney U-test
and Wilcoxon test were performed using StatView®
for Windows ver. 4.54. P value less than 0.05 were
considered statistical significant.

RESULTS

Demographic Background of Study Subjects

Twenty-one subjects with intractable chronic
urticaria [male:female=11:10, age 39.0+ 12.7 years
(range: 20-65 years) with disease lasting 13.6 + 8.9
months (range 3-36 months)] were enrolled in this
study. During the study period, no subjects dropped
out or declined to participate in the study protocol,
and no adverse events or side effects occurred. Ten
subjects were assigned to the group that received
Jumihaidokuto, and 11 were assigned to the group
that did not receive Jumihaidokuto (Figure 1).
Demographic characteristics of the Jumihaidokutotreated group were as follows: male:female = 7:3, age
38.8+14.4 years, and disease duration 15.5+8.9
months. The demographic characteristics of the
group that did not receive Jumihaidokuto were:
male:female = 4:7, age 39.2+11.4 years, and
disease duration 11.9 + 9.0 months.

 

 

 

Assessed for eligibility (n=21)

 

 

|] Excluded (n=0)
v

Randomized (n=21)

Y Y

Allocated to Jumihaidokuto +
antihistamine (n=10)

-Received allocated intervention
(n=10)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Allocated to antihistamine (n=11)
- Received allocated intervention
(n=11)

v v

Lost to follow-up (n=0) Lost to follow-up (n=0)
-Discontinued intervention (n=0) -Discontinued intervention (n=0)

y v

Analysed (n=10) Analysed (n=11)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1. Flow Diagram of Jumihaidokuto
Treatment for Chronic Spontaneous Urticaria

Impact of Jumihaidokuto on Disease Severity

At baseline, there were no apparent differences
between the two treatment groups. When comparing
the disease severity at 0 and 8 weeks, both groups
showed statistically significant improvement (P<0.05).
Disease severity for the antihistamine + Jumihaidokuto
group at 8 weeks was significantly lower than that of
the antihistamine only group (P<0.05). The change

+3.

in the severity score was significantly larger for the
antihistamine + Jumihaidokuto group compared with
the antihistamine only group (P<0.01, Figure 2).

Antihistamine
Hi Antihistamine + Jumihaidokuto

4
*
3
A
|
0 1 1

Week 0. Week 8

Figure 2. Comparison of Disease Severity at
Week 0 and 8 between Groups
Notes: *P<0.05 vs. week 0 by Wilcoxon test; “P<0.01 vs.
antihistamine group at 8 weeks by Mann-Whitney U test

Severity score
iy

 

Impact of Jumihaidokuto on Subjective
Assessment

Itch VAS tended to decrease 8 weeks after the
initiation of this study in both the antihistamine only
and antihistamine + Jumihaidokuto treatment groups;
however, these decreases were not statistically
significant between groups (P>0.05). Relative change
in the itch VAS score was not significantly different
between the two groups (Figure 3A). Results from
the brief questionnaire about the frequency of itch or
visible symptoms (e.g., wheal and erythema) showed
the superiority of Jumihaidokuto treatment for both
itch and symptoms (P<0.05, Figure 3B).

Impact of Jumihaidokuto on QOL

The Skindex-16 total score tended to decrease
after 8 weeks of treatment in both the antihistamine
and antihistamine + Jumihaidokuto groups, but this
difference was not statistically significant (Figure
4A). To further evaluate these results, we divided
the Skindex-16 questions into different core domains
(e.g., symptom, emotion, and functioning) and
compared the differences between 0 and 8 weeks
for each domain (Figure 4B). Differences in both the
symptom and emotion domains were larger for the
antihistamine + Jumihaidokuto group. Concerning
the statistical analysis, although parametric analysis
using Bonferroni's multiple comparison test found
statistical significance regarding the efficacy of
Jumihaidokuto (P<0.05), non-parametric analysis
using the Steel-Dwass multiple comparison test did
not detect a significant difference between the two
groups.
Antihistamine
HB Antihistamine + Jumihaidokuto

VAS score
ey

 

 

 

Week 0 Week 8
Itch Skin condition
0
024
3
Ss -04F
£S
2 _ogb
Bg 06
2f ost
a3
23 -10b
5a 12+
Se -al
58
OS -16/
oc
-te
* *

2.0

Figure 3. Comparison of Itch VAS Score and Brief
Questionnaire Score between Groups (x + s)
Note: *P<0.05 vs. antihistamine group by Steel-Dwass
multiple comparison test

 

ntihistamine
A 40 Antihi
BB Antihistamine + Jumihaidokuto
2
8 30
3
ij
s
o 20
x
3
ha
€ 10
Oo
0 1 1
Week 0 Week 8
B Symptom Emotion Function Total

 

25.00 4

a
= ! '

Skindex-16 (8 week — 0 week)

-30.00 4

Relative change in each domin of

 

35.00

Figure 4. Comparison of Total and Relative Change in
Each Domin of Skindex-16 between Groups

Adverse Events
During the study period, adverse event was not

Chin J Integr Med

found in all study subjects.

DISCUSSION

In this study, we found that Jumihaidokuto was
therapeutic for the treatment of CSU. The concomitant
use of Jumihaidokuto with antihistamine for 8 weeks
effectively decreased the disease severity score
when compared with antihistamine alone. However,
we did not find a significant difference between the
Skindex-16 total scores of the Jumihaidokuto +
antihistamine and antihistamine only groups using
non-parametric statistical analysis (Steel-Dwass
multiple comparison test, Appendix 2). These results
suggest that the addition of Jumihaidokuto may
attenuate the frequency of bouts of spontaneous
urticaria. We speculate that the incomplete remission
of CSU at 8 weeks might not be fully appreciated
by comparing the Skindex-16 total scores; however,
parametric statistical analysis (Bonferroni's
multiple comparison test) of the Skindex-16 scores
showed statistically significant improvement for the
Jumihaidokuto + antihistamine group.

 

Response to therapy varies markedly among
CSU patients, and patients’ adherence to the
recommended regimen is significantly affected by
their experience of the drug's effectiveness." Thus,
the increased magnitude of improvement seen in
CSU patients that were treated with Jumihaidokuto is
expected to increase their adherence to the protocol.

In this study, subjects who did not experience
symptom relief using the standard dose of
antihistamines were enrolled. Therefore, the
significant improvement in disease severity observed
in the antihistamine group was an unexpected result
for us. We speculate that enrollment in this clinical
study motivated subjects to treat their CSU, and
they may have adhered more closely to the dosing
regimen. On the other hand, a favorable effect of
Jumihaidokuto on the severity score was found after
8 weeks of treatment. Perhaps we should recommend
that patients take Jumihaidokuto for at least 8 weeks
to gain the clinical benefits.

It was also unexpected that the itch and the
subjects’ subjective symptom scores would be similar
between the two groups. This result conflicted with
the severity scores. However, this discrepancy
may be due to the fact that these assessments
Chin J Integr Med

examine different disease features. The Japanese
Dermatological Association severity scores mainly
evaluate the level of a disabling condition, discomfort,
and annoyance, whereas the questionnaire for
subjective symptoms evaluates the frequency and
intensity of both itch and wheals. Based on the
discussion above, although antihistamines alone
had some efficacy in treating patients with CSU,
Jumihaidokuto might augment the therapeutic effect of
antihistamine on the patients’ disabling condition.

The limitations of this study were the small
sample size of subjects and the lack of a treatment
group receiving Jumihaidokuto only. In spite of these
limitations, there are many cases of difficult-to-treat
CSU, and Jumihaidokuto may have value for these
suffering patients.

Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Author Contributions

KI and HM had made study protocol. KI had randomized
the study subjects. HA and HM had contributed to intervention,
and accumulated the clinical data. HM performed statistical

analysis and wrote this manuscript.

Electronic Supplementary Material: Supplementary material
(Appendixes 1 and 2) is available in the online version of this
article at http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11655-017-2950-6.

REFERENCES

1. Hide M, Hiragun T, Japanese Dermatological A. Japanese
guidelines for diagnosis and treatment of urticaria in
comparison with other countries. Allergol Int 2012;61:517-527.

2. Murota H, Kitaba S, Tani M, Wataya-Kaneda M, Azukizawa
H, Tanemura A, et al. Impact of sedative and non-sedative
antihistamines on the impaired productivity and quality
of life in patients with pruritic skin diseases. Allergol Int
2010;59:345-354.

3. Murota H, Kitaba S, Tani M, Wataya-Kaneda M, Katayama
|. Effects of nonsedative antihistamines on productivity of
patients with pruritic skin diseases. Allergy 2010;65:929-930.

4. Zhong H, Song Z, Chen W, Li H, He L, Gao T, et al.
Chronic urticaria in Chinese population: a hospital-based
multicenter epidemiological study. Allergy 2014;69:359-364.

5. Powell RJ, Leech SC, Till S, Huber PA, Nasser SM, Clark
AT, et al. BSACI guideline for the management of chronic

10.

11.

12.

13.

14,

15.

Be

urticaria and angioedema. Clin Exp Allergy 2015;45:547-565.
Zuberbier T, Aberer W, Asero R, Bindslev-Jensen C,
Brzoza Z, Canonica GW, et al. Methods report on the
development of the 2013 revision and update of the
EAACI/GA2 LEN/EDF/WAO guideline for the definition,
classification, diagnosis, and management of urticaria.
Allergy 2014;69:e1-e29.

Altrichter S, Koch K, Church MK, Maurer M. Atopic
predisposition in cholinergic urticaria patients and
its implications. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
2016;30:2060-2065.

Bailey E, Shaker M. An update on childhood urticaria and
angioedema. Curr Opin Pediatr 2008;20:425-430.

Long JW, Wang YY, Pi XM, Tu YT. Clinical observation on
the treatment of chronic urticaria with total glucosides of
paeony capsule combined with citirizine. Chin J Integr Med
2010;16:353-356.

Koseki J, Matsumoto T, Matsubara Y, Tsuchiya K,
Mizuhara Y, Sekiguchi K, et al. Inhibition of rat 5alphareductase activity and testosterone-induced sebum
synthesis in hamster sebocytes by an extract of Quercus
acutissima Cortex. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med
2015;2015:853846.

Matsumoto T, Matsubara Y, Mizuhara Y, Sekiguchi K,
Koseki J, Tsuchiya K, et al. Plasma pharmacokinetics
of polyphenols in a traditional Japanese medicine,
jumihaidokuto, which suppresses propionibacterium
acnes-induced dermatitis in rats. Molecules
2015;20:18031-18046.

Sekiguchi K, Koseki J, Tsuchiya K, Matsubara Y, lizuka S,
Imamura §S, et al. Suppression of propionibacterium acnesinduced dermatitis by a traditional Japanese medicine,
Jumihaidokuto, modifying macrophage functions. Evid
Based Complement Alternat Med 2015;2015:439258.
Hashiro M, Matsumoto C, Takijiri C, Kitaba S, Murota H,
Katayama |. Effect of Jumihaidokuto (Shi-Wei-Bai-DuTang) on dermatological symptoms of patients with atopic
dermatitis evaluation of eruption elements. Skin Res
2011;10:34-40.

Okawa A. Clinical efficacy of combination treatment of
Ketotifen (HC 20-511) with harbal medicines on chronic
urticaria. Med Consult New Remed 1987;24:923-930.
Kaneko S, Masuda K, Hiragun T, Inomata N, Furue M,
Onozuka D, et al. Transient improvement of urticaria
induces poor adherence as assessed by Morisky Medication
Adherence Scale-8. J Dermatol 2015;42:1078-1082.

(Received April 18, 2016)
Edited by YUAN Lin
