 

EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF ALLERGY 2
y AND CLINICAL IMMUNOLOGY EAACI

 

POSITION PAPER a

The EAACI/GA?LEN/EDF/WAO Guideline for the definition,
classification, diagnosis, and management of urticaria:
the 2013 revision and update

T. Zuberbier', W. Aberer?, R. Asero®, C. Bindslev-Jensen’, Z. Brzoza®, G. W. Canonica®,

M. K. Church! L. F. Ensina’, A. Giménez-Arnau®, K. Godse®, M. Goncalo”®, C. Grattan",

J. Hebert", M. Hide’, A. Kaplan", A. Kapp’, A. H. Abdul Latiff"®, P. Mathelier-Fusade’’,

M. Metz’, A. Nast', S. S. Saini'®, M. Sanchez-Borges'®, P. Schmid-Grendelmeier”,

F.E. R. Simons”, P. Staubach”, G. Sussman”’, E. Toubi*’, G. A. Vena”®, B. Wedi'®, X. J. Zhu?® &
M. Maurer

'Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Allergy-Centre-Charité, Charité — University Hospital Berlin, Berlin, Germany; Department of
Dermatology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria; 2Allergy Clinic, Clinica San Carlo, Paderno Dugnano, MI, Italy; “Department of
Dermatology and Allergy Centre, Odense University Hospital, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark; °Department of Internal
Diseases, Allergology and Clinical Immunology in Katowice, Medical University of Silesia, Zabrze, Poland; °Respiratory Diseases & Allergy,
University of Genoa, IRCCS AOU SanMartino, Genoa, Italy; 7Department of Clinical Immunology and Allergy, Federal University of Sao Paulo,
Sao Paulo, Brazil; ®Hospital del Mar. Parc de Salut Mar, Universitat Autonoma Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; °Department of Dermatology,

Dr. D. Y. Patil Medical College & Hospital, Nerul, Navi Mumbai, India; "Clinic of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital,
Coimbra, Portugal; "St John’s Institute of Dermatology, Guy's and St Thomas’ Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK; “Center for
Applied Research on Allergy Québec, Québec, QC, Canada; 'SDepartment of Dermatology, Institute of Biomedical and Health Sciences,
Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan; ‘Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Department of
Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA; '®Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover, Germany; '°Department of Paediatrics, Pantai Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Bangsar, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia; ‘Department of
Dermatology and Allergy, University Hospital of Tenon, Paris, France; 'SJohns Hopkins Asthma and Allergy Center, Baltimore, MD, USA;
18Allergy and Clinical Immunology Department Centro Médico-Docente La Trinidad, Caracas, Venezuela; 7°Allergy Unit, Department of
Dermatology, University Hospital, Ziirich, Switzerland; *'Departments of Pediatrics & Child Health, Immunology, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, MB, Canada; **Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center Mainz, Mainz, Germany; “Division of Allergy and Clinical
Immunology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; ?4Bnai-Zion Medical Center, Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel; 25Unit of
Dermatology and Venereology, Department of Biomedical Sciences and Human Oncology, University of Bari, Bari, Italy; °Department of
Dermatology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, China

 

To cite this article: Zuberbier T, Aberer W, Asero R, Bindslev-Jensen C, Brzoza Z, Canonica GW, Church MK, Ensina LF, Giménez-Arnau A, Godse K, Gongalo M,
Grattan C, Hebert J, Hide M, Kaplan A, Kapp A, Abdul Latiff AH, Mathelier-Fusade P, Metz M, Nast A, Saini SS, Sdnchez-Borges M, Schmid-Grendelmeier P,
Simons FER, Staubach P, Sussman G, Toubi E, Vena GA, Wedi B, Zhu XJ, Maurer M. The EAACI/GA*LEN/EDF/WAO Guideline for the definition, classification,
diagnosis, and management of urticaria: the 2013 revision and update. Allergy 2014; 69: 868-887

Keywords Abstract
angioedema; consensus; hives; urticaria; . co. . . . . .
WHEL: This guideline is the result of a systematic literature review using the “Grading of
Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation’ (GRADE) methodCorrespondence ology and a structured consensus conference held on 28 and 29 November 2012,
Torsten Zuberbier, Department of in Berlin. It is a joint initiative of the Dermatology Section of the European AcaDermatology and Allergy, Allergy Centre demy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology (EAACI), the EU-funded network of
Charité, Charité University Hospital Berlin, excellence, the Global Allergy and Asthma European Network (GA?LEN), the
Charitéplatz 1, D-10117 Berlin, Germany. European Dermatology Forum (EDF), and the World Allergy Organization
Tel.: +49-30-450-518135 (WAO) with the participation of delegates of 21 national and international socieFax) :49-20460-518919 ties. Urticaria is a frequent, mast cell-driven disease, presenting with wheals, anE-mail: torsten.2uberbier@charite.de gioedema, or both. The life-time prevalence for acute urticaria is approximately

 

20%. Chronic spontaneous urticaria and other chronic forms of urticaria do not

*Endorsing societies are listed in . . .
only cause a decrease in quality of life, but also affect performance at work and

Appendix 1. . . .

school and, as such, are members of the group of severe allergic diseases. This
Accepted for publication 30 September guideline covers the definition and classification of urticaria, taking into account
2013 the recent progress in identifying its causes, eliciting factors and pathomecha
868 Allergy 69 (2014) 868-887 © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Zuberbier et al. EAACI/GA?LEN/EDF/WAO urticaria guideline

DOI:10.111 1/all.12313 nisms. In addition, it outlines evidence-based diagnostic and therapeutic

approaches for the different subtypes of urticaria. This guideline was acknowl
Edited by: Thomas Bieber

This guideline is the result of a systematic literature review
using the ‘Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation’ (GRADE) methodology and a structured
consensus conference held on 28 and 29 November 2012, in
Berlin. It is a joint initiative of the European Academy of
Allergy and Clinical Immunology (EAACI) Dermatology Section, GA*LEN, the European Dermatology Forum (EDF),
and the World Allergy Organization (WAO) with the participation of delegates of 21 national and international societies. The
American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology
(AAAAJ) participated in the process of developing these guidelines, but is not an endorsing founder society (see Acknowledgments). It is an update and revision of the previous EAACI/
GA?LEN/EDF/WAO guidelines on urticaria (1, 2).

The wide diversity and number of different urticaria subtypes
that have been identified reflect, at least in part, our increasing
understanding of the causes and eliciting factors of urticaria
and the molecular and cellular mechanisms involved in its
pathogenesis. The aim of this guideline is to provide an updated
definition and classification of urticaria, thereby facilitating the
interpretation of divergent data from different centers regarding underlying causes, eliciting factors, and therapeutic responsiveness of subtypes of urticaria. Furthermore, this guideline
provides recommendations for diagnostic and therapeutic
approaches in common subtypes of urticaria. This guideline
has involved societies and experts from all areas of the world
and as a global guideline thus also takes into consideration that
causative factors in patients, medical systems, and access to
diagnosis and treatment vary in different countries.

 

Methods

The detailed methods used in the development of this guideline 2013 revision and update, including all evaluations of the
literature, are published in a separate paper for the sake of
brevity and readability. A brief summary is provided here as
Appendix 2.

In short, as members of the panel and delegates of their societies, the authors had prepared in advance their suggestions
regarding the definition, classification, diagnosis, and treatment of urticaria. The resulting draft of the guideline took into
account all available evidence in the literature (including Medline and Embase searches as well as manual search of abstracts
at international allergy congresses between 2004 and 2012) and
was based on the existing consensus papers of the first three
symposia in 2000, 2004, and 2008 (1-6). These suggestions
were then discussed in detail between the panel and the participants of the meeting. A consensus was finally achieved during
a structured consensus conference using a TED voting system.
The participation of urticaria specialists from 39 countries
ensured that this consensus includes regional differences
worldwide in viewpoint and provides a basis for improved
comparison of future studies in the field of urticaria.

edged and accepted by the European Union of Medical Specialists (UEMS).

In the previous version of the guideline, studies were
already partly evaluated using the GRADE approach. The
key principle of the GRADE approach is to provide transparency and clear, explicit criteria for assessing the quality of
evidence (see Table 1) and grading the strength of recommendations (7-11) based on risk vs benefits.

The following translation to the GRADE quality of evidence was used acknowledging that a more detailed assessment will possibly change the quality of evidence and that
additional quality criteria are considered in GRADE.

 

SIGN level of evidence GRADE quality of evidence

 

re High
a Moderate
1 Low
Br Low
2° Low
a Very low
3 Very low
4 Very low

For this 2013 revision and update, a modified version of
GRADE was applied throughout the guideline. The questions
addressed were developed by the panel members and selected
with respect to their relevance by all the panel members in a
Delphi voting. The selection and wording process used as well
as other methodological details are described in a separate

Table 1 Levels of evidence for identified literature sources

The quality of the evidence was assessed using the Methodology

Checklist 2: RCTs of the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines

Network (SIGN; compare for (2))

1** High-quality meta-analyses, systematic reviews of RCTs, or
RCTs with a very low risk of bias

7 Well-conducted meta-analyses, systematic reviews of RCTs,
or RCTs with a low risk of bias

1~ Meta-analyses, systematic reviews of RCTs, or RCTs with a
high risk of bias

2** High-quality systematic reviews of case-controlled or cohort
or studies. High-quality case-controlled or cohort studies
with a very low risk of confounding, bias, or chance and a
high probability that the relationship is causal

ay Well-conducted case-controlled or cohort studies with a low
risk of confounding, bias, or chance and a moderate
probability that the relationship is causal

a Case-controlled or cohort studies with a high risk of
confounding, bias, or chance and a significant risk that the
relationship is not causal

3) Nonanalytic studies, for example case reports, case series

4 Expert opinion

RCT, randomized controlled trials

Allergy 69 (2014) 868-887 © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 869
EAACI/GA?LEN/EDF/WAO urticaria guideline

report on methods used for the generation of this revision and
update of the guideline. Briefly, the strength of a recommendation
and the quality of supporting evidence were assessed independently by two assessors for each recommendation. They took
into consideration as negative/risk: side-effects (graded on
severity) and costs; and as benefits: reduction in urticaria
symptoms (e.g., UAS7 [UAS, Urticaria Activity Score; UAS7,
Average Urticaria Activity Score for 7 days] in newer studies)
and improvement in quality of life (QoL). Importantly, the
GRADE system permits strong recommendations supported by
low- or (very rarely) very-low-quality evidence from downgraded RCTs or observational studies. On the other hand, weak
recommendations may be based on high-quality evidence if
other factors are important, for example the price of a treatment
option.

The expression ‘we recommend’ was used for strong recommendations and ‘we suggest’ for weak recommendations
in order to adhere to the same methodology used for the
Allergic Rhinitis and its Impact on Asthma guideline 2008
update (10). This same terminology has also been adhered to
in those parts of the guideline where the assessment of the
evidence was not done in full.

Participants of the consensus conference were presented
with a draft version of this document and were asked to discuss and vote whether they agreed with recommendations
and other specific parts of the text. It was only allowed to
vote yes or no, to ensure clear majority decisions. In statements not receiving votes >90% during the first voting, the
recommendation was re-discussed, rephrased, and re-voted
and passed in the following votings if a minimum of >75%
agreement was achieved.

Conflicts of interest of all group members were collected
prior to the consensus conferences. They were assessed by
the steering committee. All declarations of conflicts of interest are presented as online Supporting Information to this
guideline and in detail in the methods report.

 

Definition

Urticaria is a disease characterized by the development of
wheals (hives), angioedema, or both. Urticaria needs to be
differentiated from other medical conditions where wheals,
angioedema, or both can occur as a symptom, for example
skin prick test, anaphylaxis, auto-inflammatory syndromes,
or hereditary angioedema (bradykinin-mediated angioedema).

Clinical appearance

Urticaria is characterized by the sudden appearance of

wheals, angioedema, or both.

A wheal consists of three typical features:

1 It is characterized by a central swelling of variable size,
almost invariably surrounded by a reflex erythema.

2 It is associated with itching or sometimes a burning sensation.

3 It has a fleeting nature, with the skin returning to its normal appearance, usually within 1-24 h. Sometimes wheals
resolve even more quickly.

Angioedema is characterized by

Zuberbier et al.

1 A sudden, pronounced erythematous or skin-colored
swelling of the lower dermis and subcutis with frequent
involvement below mucous membranes and

2 Sometimes pain rather than itching and frequent involvement below mucous membranes. Its resolution is slower
than that for wheals and can take up to 72 h.

Pathophysiological aspects

Urticaria is a mast-cell-driven disease. Histamine and other
mediators, such as platelet-activating factor (PAF) and cytokines released from activated mast cells, result in sensory
nerve activation, vasodilatation, and plasma extravasation as
well as cell recruitment to urticarial lesions. The mast-cellactivating signals in urticaria are ill-defined and likely to be
heterogeneous and diverse. Histologically, wheals are characterized by edema of the upper and mid-dermis, with dilatation of
the postcapillary venules and lymphatic vessels of the upper
dermis. In angioedema, similar changes occur primarily in the
lower dermis and the subcutis. Skin affected by wheals virtually
always exhibits upregulation of endothelial cell adhesion molecules and a mixed inflammatory perivascular infiltrate of variable intensity, consisting of neutrophils and/or eosinophils,
macrophages, and T cells, but without vessel-wall necrosis,
which is a hallmark at wrticaria vasculitis (12-14). A mild-tomoderate increase of mast cell numbers has also been reported
by some authors. In delayed pressure urticaria, the infiltrate is
typically located in the mid- to lower dermis. In some subtypes
of urticaria, up-regulation of adhesion molecules (15) and
altered cytokine expression are also seen in uninvolved skin
(16). These findings underline the complex nature of the pathogenesis of urticaria, which has many features in addition to the
release of histamine from dermal mast cells (17, 18).

These changes are also seen in a wide variety of inflammatory reactions and are thus not specific or of diagnostic
value. A search for more specific histological biomarkers for
different subtypes of urticaria is desirable.

Considerations about patient-related outcomes in patients
with urticaria

Quality of life
Patient-related outcomes are important to be looked at in the
treatment for urticaria (19). The available data indicate that
urticaria has a detrimental effect on both objective functioning and subjective well-being. For example, O’Donnell et al.
(20) showed that health status scores in patients with chronic
spontaneous urticaria (CSU) are comparable to those
reported by patients with coronary artery disease. Furthermore, both health status and subjective satisfaction in
patients with CSU are lower than in healthy subjects and in
patients with respiratory allergy (21). A study of Poon et al.
(22) focused on the extent and nature of disability in
different types of urticaria, showing a large variation in
Health-Related Quality of Life (HR-QoL) scores within
different urticarial subsets. In this study, the assessment of
HR-QoL was performed using generic tools.

A QoL Questionnaire specifically developed for CSU was
validated, including physical, emotional, social, and practical

870 Allergy 69 (2014) 868-887 © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Zuberbier et al.

aspects characteristic of this condition (23). This new
tool named Chronic Urticaria Quality of Life Questionnaire
(CU-Q2oL) was originally generated and tested in the Italian
language following well-established procedures. The CUQ2oL meets the standards for validity with good construct
validity, internal consistency, reliability, and responsiveness.
These psychometric characteristics make it suitable for the
assessment of the health burden of CSU. It has now been
translated and validated in German, Spanish, Polish, Turkish, Greek, Bulgarian, Brazilian-Portuguese, and other versions are currently being validated (24-28). In addition,
another questionnaire covers patients with angioedema (29).
The Angioedema Quality of Life Questionnaire (AE-QoL), a
symptom-specific Qol instrument, has been developed in German (29) and has been translated in various languages,
including English (USA), Spanish, French, Azeri, Swedish,
Hungarian, Romanian, Greek, and Polish.

Which instrument should be used to measure
QoL in urticaria?

We recommend using the validated CU-Q2o0L and AE-QoL
instruments for assessing QoL impairment and to monitor disease activity (strong recommendation/clinical consensus).

 

Classification of urticaria on the basis of its duration,
frequency, and causes

The spectrum of clinical manifestations of different urticaria
subtypes is very wide. Additionally, two or more different
subtypes of urticaria can coexist in any given patient.

Acute urticaria is defined as the occurrence of spontaneous
wheals, angioedema, or both for <6 weeks. Table 2 presents
a classification for clinical use of chronic urticaria subtypes.
This revised classification deals with previous inconsistencies,
for example physical urticarias may also be chronic

Table 2 Classification of chronic urticaria subtypes (presenting
with wheals, angioedema, or both)

Chronic urticaria subtypes

 

Chronic spontaneous urticaria Inducible urticaria

 

Spontaneous appearance of
wheals, angioedema, or
both >6 weeks due to known
or unknown causes

Symptomatic dermographism*
Cold urticariat

Delayed pressure urticariat
Solar urticaria

Heat urticaria§

Vibratory angioedema
Cholinergic urticaria

Contact urticaria

Aquagenic urticaria

*also called urticaria factitia, dermographic urticaria; talso called
cold contact urticaria; {also called pressure urticaria; §also called
heat contact urticaria.

EAACI/GA?LEN/EDF/WAO urticaria guideline

conditions, but they were grouped separately due to the
special nature of their eliciting physical factors. Urticaria
pigmentosa (cutaneous mastocytosis), urticaria
auto-inflammatory syndromes (e.g., cryopyrin-associated
periodic syndromes or Schnitzler’s syndrome), and nonmast
cell mediators mediated/induced angioedema (e.g., bradykinin-mediated angioedema) are not considered to be subtypes
of urticaria, due to their distinctly different pathomechanisms, but are listed in Table 3 for reference. Wheals are also
features of several syndromes (Table 3).

vasculitis,

Assessment of disease activity and impact

Disease activity in spontaneous urticaria should be assessed
both in clinical care and in trials with the UAS7 (Table 4), a
unified and simple scoring system that was proposed in the
last version of the guidelines and has been validated (30). The
signs and symptoms are evaluated by the patient making this
score especially valuable. The use of the UAS facilitates com
Table 3 Diseases related to urticaria for historical reasons and
syndromes that present with hives and/or angioedema

e Maculopapular cutaneous mastocytosis (urticaria pigmentosa)
e Urticarial vasculitis

e Bradykinin-mediated angioedema (e.g., HAE)

Exercise-induced anaphylaxis

Cryopyrin-associated periodic syndromes (CAPS; urticarial rash,
recurrent fever attacks, arthralgia or arthritis, eye inflammation,
fatigue and headaches), that is, familial cold autoinflammatory
syndrome (FCAS), Muckle-Wells syndrome (MWS), or neonatal
onset multisystem inflammatory disease (NOMID).
Schnitzler's syndrome (recurrent urticarial rash and monoclonal
gammopathy, recurrent fever attacks, bone and muscle pain,
arthralgia or arthritis and lymphadenopathy

e Gleich’s syndrome (episodic angioedema with eosinophilia)

e Well’s syndrome (Granulomatous dermatitis with eosinophilia)

These diseases and syndromes are related to urticaria (i) because
they present with wheals, angioedema, or both and/or (ii) because
of historical reasons.

Table 4 The UAS7 for assessing disease activity in CSU

 

Score Wheals Pruritus
0 None None
1 Mild (<20 wheals/24 h) Mild (present but not
annoying or troublesome)
2 Moderate (20-50 Moderate (troublesome but
wheals/24 h) does not interfere with
normal daily activity or
sleep)
3 Intense (>50 wheals/24 h Intense (severe pruritus,
or large confluent areas of which is sufficiently
wheals) troublesome to interfere

with normal daily activity or
sleep)

Sum of score: 0-6 for each day is summarized over one week
(maximum 42).

Allergy 69 (2014) 868-887 © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 871
EAACI/GA?LEN/EDF/WAO urticaria guideline Zuberbier et al.

 

parison of study results from different centers. The UAS is example, different traditional diets and different prevalence
based on the assessment of key urticaria symptoms (wheals of infections. Thus, it is important to remember that not all
and pruritus). It is suitable for the evaluation of disease activ- possible causative factors need to be investigated in all
ity by urticaria patients and their treating physicians. Further- patients and the first step in diagnosis is a thorough history,
more, this scoring system has been widely used in trials and taking the following questions into consideration:
should thus be maintained for future comparison. As urticaria 1 Time of onset of disease
symptoms change frequently in intensity, the overall disease 2 Frequency/duration of and provoking factors for wheals
activity is best measured by advising patients to document 24- 3 Diurnal variation
h self-evaluation scores once daily for several days. A modifi- 4 Occurrence in relation to weekends, holidays, and forcation of the UAS7 assessing signs and symptoms two times eign travel
per day was also validated (31), but voting preferred to use 5 Shape, size, and distribution of wheals
the classical UAS because (i) measuring only once daily for 6 Associated angioedema
the last 24 h does give a bias in patients with primarily noc- 7 Associated subjective symptoms of lesions, for example
turnal symptoms only and (ii) it has been more widely used itch, pain
and it is important to use the same tool worldwide in trials to 8 Family and personal history regarding urticaria, atopy
allow comparison. The UAS7, that is, the sum score of seven 9 Previous or current allergies, infections, internal diseases,
consecutive days, should be used in routine clinical practice to or other possible causes
determine disease activity and response to treatment of 10 Psychosomatic and psychiatric diseases
patients with CSU, as well as in some cases of patients with 11 Surgical implantations and events during surgery, for
inducible or physical urticaria as well. For patients with an- example after local anesthesia
gioedema, a novel activity score, the Angioedema Activity 12 Gastric/intestinal problems
Score has been developed and validated (29). In addition to 13 Induction by physical agents or exercise
disease activity, it is important to assess the impact of disease 14 Use of drugs (e.g., non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
on QoL both in clinical practice and in trials. drugs (NSAIDs), injections, immunizations, hormones,

In physical urticaria and in cholinergic urticaria, the laxatives, suppositories, ear and eye drops, and alternathreshold of the eliciting factor(s) should be determined to tive remedies)
assess severity, for example critical temperature and stimula- 15 Observed correlation to food
tion time thresholds for cold provocation in cold urticaria. 16 Relationship to the menstrual cycle
These thresholds allow both patients and treating physicians 17 Smoking habits (especially use of perfumed tobacco
to evaluate disease activity and response to treatment. products or cannabis)

18 Type of work
19 Hobbies
Should the current classification be maintained 20 Stress (eustress and distress)
in urticaria? 21 Quality of life related to urticaria and emotional impact

22 Previous therapy and response to therapy
23 Previous diagnostic procedures/results

The second step of the diagnosis is the physical examination of the patient. This should include a diagnostic provocation test including drug, food, and physical tests where it is
Should the current activity score (UAS7) be indicated by history.
maintained assessing severity in urticaria? All subsequent diagnostic steps will depend very much on
We recommend to use the UAS7 to assess severity (strong patient history and on the nature of the urticaria subtype, as
recommendation/clinical consensus). summarized in Fig. | and Table S.

We recommend to use this updated version of the classification 2013 revision (strong recommendation/clinical consensus).

 

 

Should routine diagnostic measures be _ performed in acute urticaria?

In the last two decades, many advances have been made in We recommend against any routine diagnostic measures in
identifying causes of different types and subtypes of urticaria, acute urticaria (strong recommendation/clinical consensus).

for example, in CSU reviewed in Refs (32-33). Among others, autoreactivity including autoimmunity mediated by functional autoantibodies directed against the IgE receptor,
pseudo-allergy (nonallergic hypersensitivity reactions) to
foods and drugs, and acute or chronic infections (e.g., Helicobacter pylori or Anisakis simplex) have been described (34- We recommend for only very limited routine diagnostic mea44) (Table 5). However, there are considerable variations in sures in chronic spontaneous urticaria (strong recommendation/
the frequency of underlying causes in the different studies. clinical consensus).

This also reflects regional differences in the world, for

Diagnosis of urticaria

Should routine diagnostic measures be performed in chronic spontaneous urticaria?

 

872 Allergy 69 (2014) 868-887 © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Zuberbier et al.

Table 5 Recommended diagnostic tests in frequent urticaria subtypes

Routine diagnostic tests

EAACI/GA?LEN/EDF/WAO urticaria guideline

Extended diagnostic program* (suggested based on
history only)

For identification of underlying causes or eliciting
factors and for ruling out possible differential diagnoses

 

Types Subtypes (recommended) if indicated
Spontaneous Acute spontaneous urticaria None None+
urticaria Chronic spontaneous Differential blood count. Test for (in no preferred order): (i) infectious diseases
urticaria ESR or CRP (e.g., Helicobacter pylori), (ii) type | allergy, (iii)
Omission of suspected functional autoantibodies, (iv) thyroid hormones
drugs (e.g., NSAID) and autoantibodies, (v) skin tests including physical
tests, (vi) pseudoallergen-free diet for 3 weeks, (vii)
tryptaset, (viii) autologous serum skin test, and
(ix) lesional skin biopsy
Inducible Cold urticaria Cold provocation and Differential blood count and ESR or CRP cryoproteins
urticaria threshold test (ice cube, rule out other diseases, especially infections

cold water, cold wind)

Delayed pressure urticaria Pressure test and None
threshold test
Heat urticaria Heat provocation and None

Solar urticaria

Symptomatic

threshold test
UV and visible light of
different wavelengths
and threshold test
Elicit dermographism

Rule out other light-induced dermatoses

Differential blood count, ESR or CRP

dermographism and threshold None
Vibratory Angioedema test (dermographometer)
Test with, for example,
vortex
Aquagenic urticaria Wet cloths at body None
temperature
applied for 20 min
Cholinergic urticaria Exercise and hot bath provocation None
Contact urticaria Cutaneous provocation None

test. Skin tests with
immediate readings,
for example prick test

ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; CRP, C-reactive protein.
*Depending on suspected cause.

+Unless strongly suggested by patient history, for example allergy.
tAs indication of severe systemic disease.

Intensive and costly general screening programs for causes
of urticaria are strongly advised against. The following factors should only be investigated based on patient history.
Type I allergy is a rare cause of CSU in patients who present
with daily or almost daily symptoms, but may be considered
in CSU patients with intermittent symptoms. In contrast,
pseudo-allergic (non-allergic hypersensitivity reactions) to
NSAIDs food or food additives may be more relevant for
CSU with daily symptoms. Diagnosis should be based on an
easy-to-follow diet protocol (see patient information page in
different languages under http://www.ecarf.org/).

Bacterial, viral, parasitic, or fungal infections, for example,
with H. pylori, Streptococci, Staphylococci, Versinia, Giardia
lamblia, Mycoplasma pneumonia, Hepatitis virus, Norovirus,
Parvovirus B19, Anisakis simplex, Entamoeba ssp., Blastocystis

Should extended diagnostic measures be performed in chronic spontaneous urticaria?
We recommend for only limited extended diagnostic measures

in chronic spontaneous urticaria based on patient history
(strong recommendation/clinical consensus).

Should routine diagnostic measures be _ performed in inducible, non-spontaneous subtypes
of urticaria?

 

We recommend limiting routine diagnostic measures to determining the threshold of eliciting factors in inducible urticaria
subtypes (strong recommendation/clinical consensus).

 

Allergy 69 (2014) 868-887 © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 873
EAACI/GA?LEN/EDF/WAO urticaria guideline

Wheals

 

Recurrent unexplained fever?
Joint/bone pain? Malaise?

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Zuberbier et al.

Angioedema

 

ACE inhibitor treatment?*

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

an
lo > (>) es a
Ys VY VY Ys 8
Vv Vv Vv Vv
Autoinflammatory | ——p) Average wheal 25 259 \t-— Remission
disease?2? duration > 24h?" HAE Or AEs"? after stop?®
DOLD @QLO DLA OLA
wy wy S Noy Nor Y ey, Y
Vv Vv Ss
Signs of vasculitis Are symptoms =
in biopsy?” > inducible?® a
2)
a
(=) (>) (Sy @ 2.
YY YY WY e/ =
w
v a
Provocation
test?

Vv Vv Vv
Acquired/ Urticarial Chronic Chronic HAE Fell ACE-Inh
hereditary vasculitis spontaneous inducible AAE induced

AID”? urticaria’ urticaria AE =

o

i)

Fi

‘ Histamine and other = ®
Interleukin-1 Bradykinin =

Figure 1 Recommended diagnosis algorithm for urticaria. Diagnostic algorithm for patients presenting with wheals, angioedema, or
both. AAE, Acquired angioedema due to C1-inhibitor deficiency;
ACE-Inh, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; AE, angioedema;
AH, Antihistamine; AID, Auto-inflammatory disease; HAE, Hereditary angioedema; IL-1, Interleukin-1. "Other (new) drugs may also
induce bradykinin-mediated angioedema. 7Patients should be asked
for a detailed family history and age of disease onset. “Test for elevated inflammation markers (C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate), test for paraproteinemia in adults, look for signs of
neutrophil-rich infiltrates in skin biopsy; perform gene mutation
analysis of hereditary periodic fever syndromes (e.g., cryopyrinassociated periodic syndrome), if strongly suspected. “Patients
should be asked: ‘How long do your wheals last?’ 'Test for Complement C4, C1-INH levels and function; in addition, test for C1q
and C1-INH antibodies, if AAE is suspected; do gene mutation
analysis, if former tests are unremarkable but patient's history suggests hereditary angioedema. °Wait for up to 6 months for remission; additional diagnostics to test for C1-inhibitor deficiency should
only be performed, if the family history suggests hereditary angioe
874

mast cell mediators

dema. ’Does the biopsy of lesional skin show damage of the small
vessels in the papillary and reticular dermis and/or fibrinoid deposits
in perivascular and interstitial locations suggestive of UV (urticarial
vasculitis)? °Patients should be asked: ‘Can you make your wheals
come?’ °In patients with a history suggestive of inducible urticaria,
standardized provocation testing according to international consensus recommendations (45) should be performed. '°Acquired autoinflammatory syndromes (AIDs) include Schnitzler’s syndrome as
well as systemic-onset juvenile idiopathic arthritis (sJIA) and adultonset Still’s disease (AOSD); hereditary AIDs include cryopyrinassociated periodic syndromes (CAPS) such as familial cold autoinflammatory syndromes (FCAS), Muckle-Wells syndrome (MWS)
and neonatal onset multisystem inflammatory disease (NOMID),
more rarely hyper-lgD syndrome (HIDS) and tumor necrosis factor
receptor alpha-associated periodic syndrome (TRAPS). ‘In some
rare cases, recurrent angioedema is neither mast cell mediatormediated nor bradykinin-mediated, and the underlying pathomechanisms remain unknown. These rare cases are referred to as ‘idiopathic angioedema’ by some authors.

Allergy 69 (2014) 868-887 © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Zuberbier et al.

spp., have been implicated to be underlying causes of CSU.
The frequency and relevance of infectious diseases varies
between different patient groups and different geographical
regions. For example, Anisakis simplex, a sea fish nematode,
has only been discussed as a possible cause of recurrent acute
spontaneous urticaria in areas of the world where uncooked
fish is eaten frequently (46). The relevance of H. pylori, dental
or ear, nose, and throat infections also appears to vary
between patient groups. Altogether, more research is needed
to make definitive recommendations regarding the role of
infection in urticaria.

Routine screening for malignancies in the diagnosis of
underlying causes for urticaria is not suggested. Although it
is noted that a slightly increased prevalence has
been reported in Taiwan (47), there is not sufficient evidence
available for a causal correlation of urticaria with neoplastic
diseases. Ruling out malignancies is, however, warranted if
patient history (e.g., sudden loss of weight) points at this.

Currently, the only generally available test to screen for
autoantibodies against either IgE or FceR1 (the high affinity
receptor) is the autologous serum skin test (ASST), a
nonspecific screening test that evaluates the presence of
serum histamine-releasing factors of any type, not just histamine-releasing autoantibodies. In some countries, a basophil
release test is available and may be used. General experience,
including that of the panel, is that healthy controls and
patients without CSU do not have positive ASST responses
as defined by an inflammatory red wheal response (48-60).
In contrast to most previously published studies, some
studies have demonstrated a relatively high prevalence of
positive ASST reactivity in 30-50% of adult patients with
allergic or nonallergic respiratory symptoms, reaching up
to 80% in childhood populations (53-56, 61). In two of
these studies, 40-45% of healthy individuals also had a
positive ASST although the criteria that used to define
positivity were adopted from those that had been validated
only for CSU. The meaning of these discrepancies is
unclear. The ASST should be performed with utmost care
because infections might be transmitted if, by mistake,
patients were injected with someone else’s serum. A more
refined laboratory test evaluates the in vitro histamine
release from basophils. The subject is further elucidated in
a separate EAACI/GA?LEN position paper (62).

Additional blood tests such as antinuclear antibody test
can also be considered if the patient history points at this.
Recent evidence has also shown an elevated D-dimer level in
some CSU patients, those patients responded to anticoagulation therapy in an uncontrolled pilot study (63). This adds
further information to older reports on anticoagulation as
alternative treatment, but the overall relevance is not yet
clear.

In physical urticaria, the routine diagnosis is mainly aimed
at the identification of the subtype by the appropriate physical
stimulation tests and to the determination of trigger thresholds. The latter is important as it allows for assessing disease
severity and response to treatment. For most types of physical
urticaria, no validated tools for provocation testing exist.
Exceptions include cold urticaria, where a Peltier element
EAACI/GA?LEN/EDF/WAO urticaria guideline

based provocation device (TempTes?®) is available (64, 65),
symptomatic dermographism for which a dermographometers
have been developed (66) and delayed pressure urticaria (67).
In other physical urticarias or cholinergic urticaria, graded
provocation tests with office-based methods, for example
ergometer provocation in cholinergic urticaria, should be standardized in the single practice setting to allow comparison of
disease activity at different time points in the same patient.
Finally, contact urticaria should be demonstrated with cutaneous provocation tests, for example prick tests (68).

In some subjects with active CSU, several groups have
noted blood basopenia and that blood basophils exhibit suppressed IgE-receptor-mediated histamine release to anti-IgE.
Blood basophils are detected in skin lesions and in nonlesional skin of CSU patients. CSU remission is associated with
increases in blood basophil numbers and IgE receptor triggered histamine response (69, 70). This finding, however,
needs to be examined in future research and currently does
not lead to diagnostic recommendations. However, it should
be noted that a low basophil blood count should not result
in further diagnostic procedures.

Diagnosis in children

Urticaria can occur in all age groups. Acute spontaneous
urticaria is common in infants and young children, particularly in atopics. For example, it was experienced by 42% of
the placebo-treated children in the 18-month EPAAC study.
Inducers included acute viral infection or (more frequently
than in older children and adults) ingestion of food such as
milk, egg, or peanut, to which the infant/child is sensitized.
In these young patients, food-induced generalized acute urticaria is often a harbinger of anaphylaxis. They should therefore be investigated for sensitization to foods suggested by
the history, in order to confirm their specific food trigger
and, through avoidance of this trigger, prevent subsequent
episodes.

The underlying causes of CSU appear not to be different
between children and adults. In general, further epidemiological studies in children are needed. However, it is becoming apparent that the differences between the underlying
causes of urticaria in children and adults are only small, indicating that the diagnostic approach should therefore be the
same as in adults (71-73) except possibly in infants (74).
However, there appear to be differences in the frequency of
some of the underlying causes (75).

Management of urticaria

Basic considerations

1 Urticaria is defined as a (with the exception of acute urticaria) chronic condition where partly unknown stimuli
cause mast cells to release their mediators leading to small
(wheals) or larger and deeper (angioedema) edema of the
skin. While the classification of different subtypes is important in view of the diagnostic approach, the therapeutic
approach is universal and based on the same principles as
in other mast-cell-dependent diseases in the field of allergy:

Allergy 69 (2014) 868-887 © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 875
EAACI/GA?LEN/EDF/WAO urticaria guideline

(i) elimination/avoidance of the cause or trigger/stimulus,
(i) symptomatic pharmacological treatment by reducing
mast cell mediator release and/or the effect of these mediators at the target organ, and (iii) inducing tolerance.

2 For mast cell-dependent diseases in the field of allergy
and immunology (n.b. the field of allergy and immunology covers not only the directly IgE-dependent allergic
reactions), the common feature is that the underlying condition itself is chronic. The severity of symptoms and the
nature and magnitude of the stimulus or stimuli provoking or perpetuating symptoms vary from one patient to
another. Thus, a patient with grass pollen or peanut
allergy is asymptomatic when not in contact with the
stimulus, and a cold urticaria patient can be asymptomatic in a warm climate, but they are not healthy. Management and treatment needs to take these variations into
consideration. For urticaria treatment, as in other allergic
or immunologic diseases, an algorithm is needed to both
serve the majority of patients with easy-to-treat symptoms
and those being more refractory to treatment. It also has
to be considered that the need for treatment within this
algorithm may vary over time (step up — step down). This
is in line with considerations of severity in other areas of
allergy and immunology (76, 77).

3 Acute urticaria differs from all other types as it is selflimited. Treatment is usually focused on symptomatic
relief.

  

Should treatment aim at complete symptom
control in urticaria?

We recommend aiming for complete symptom control in urti
caria as safely as possible (strong recommendation/clinical
consensus following the WHO constitution in conformity with
the Charter of the United Nations).

 

Identification and elimination/avoidance of the stimulus

With the use of this therapeutic approach, an exact diagnosis
is a basic prerequisite. Identifying the cause of urticaria is
not, however, easily possible in most cases, for example infections may be a cause, aggravating factor or unassociated
bystander.

If remission following elimination of the suspected agent
occurs, only recurrence of symptoms in a double-blind provocation test will provide definitive proof of its causative nature because spontaneous remission of urticaria might also
occur incidentally in parallel with, but not because of, the
elimination of a suspected cause or trigger.

Drugs. When such agents are suspected in the course of diagnosis, they should be omitted entirely or substituted by
another class of agents if indispensable. Drugs causing nonallergic hypersensitivity reactions (the prototypes being
NSAID) cannot only elicit, but can also aggravate pre-existing CSU (78), so that elimination in the latter case will only
improve symptoms in some patients.

Zuberbier et al.

Physical stimuli. Avoidance of physical stimuli for the treatment of physical urticaria is desirable, but not always simple.
Detailed information about the physical properties of the
respective stimulus should make the patient sufficiently
knowledgeable to recognize and control exposure in normal
daily life. Thus, for instance, it is important in delayed pressure urticaria/angioedema and in symptomatic dermographism/urticaria factitia to point out that pressure is defined
as force per area and that simple measures, such as broadening of the handle of heavy bags for pressure urticaria or
reducing friction in case of symptomatic dermographism/urticaria factitia, may already be helpful in the prevention of
symptoms. Similar considerations hold for cold urticaria
where the impact of the chill factor in cold winds needs to be
remembered. For solar urticaria, the exact identification of
the range of eliciting wavelengths may be important for the
appropriate selection of sunscreens or for the selection of
light bulbs with an UV-A filter. However, in many patients,
the threshold for the relevant physical trigger is low and total
avoidance of symptoms is virtually impossible. Severe dermographic urticaria is sometimes confused with CSU because
seemingly spontaneous hives are observed where even loosefitting clothing rubs on the patient’s skin or unintentional
scratching by patients readily develop wheals on that area.

Eradication of infectious agents and treatment of inflammatory
processes. In contrast to physical urticaria where co-existing, potentially disease-sustaining factors are only found
occasionally in cold and dermographic urticaria (symptomatic dermographism/urticaria factitia), CSU is often
reported to be associated with a variety of inflammatory
or infectious diseases. This is regarded as significant in
some instances, but some studies show conflicting results
and have methodological weaknesses. These infections,
which should be treated appropriately, include those of the
gastrointestinal tract, such as H. pylori (even if association
with urticaria is not clear in the individual patient and a
meta-analysis shows overall low evidence for this therapy
(79), H. pylori should be eliminated as it is associated with
gastric cancer) or bacterial infections of the nasopharynx
(41, 80-83). Bowel parasites, a rare possible cause of CSU
in developed industrial countries, should be eliminated (84).
In the past, intestinal candidiasis was regarded as a highly
important underlying cause of CSU (85), but more recent
findings fail to support a significant causative role. Apart
from infectious diseases, chronic inflammatory processes
due to diverse other diseases have been identified as potentially causative for CSU in the recent past. This holds particularly for gastritis, reflux oesophagitis, or inflammation
of the bile duct or gall bladder (37, 86). However, similar
to infections, it is not easily possible to discern whether
any of these are relevant causes of CSU.

Reduction of functional autoantibodies. There is still only little
experience in the treatment for CSU by direct reduction of
functional autoantibodies by plasmapheresis, which has been
shown to be of temporary benefit in individual, severely
affected patients (87). Due to high costs, this therapy is

876 Allergy 69 (2014) 868-887 © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Zuberbier et al.

suggested for autoantibody-positive CSU patients who are
unresponsive to all other forms of treatment.

Dietary management. IgE-mediated food allergy is rarely
the underlying cause of CSU (36, 37). If identified, the specific food allergens need to be omitted as far as possible.
In a subgroup of CSU patients, pseudoallergic reactions
(non-IgE-mediated hypersensitivity reactions) to naturally
occurring food ingredients and in some cases to food additives have been observed (36, 37, 88-90). Since the last version of the guidelines, the proposed pseudoallergen-free diet
has now also been successfully tested in different countries
(91).

Similar to drugs, pseudoallergens can both elicit and
aggravate CSU (92). In these cases, a diet containing only
low levels of natural as well as artificial food pseudoallergens
should be instituted and maintained for a prolonged period,
at least 3-6 months. It should be underlined that avoidance
of type I-allergens clears urticaria symptoms within 24-48 h
if the relevant allergens are eliminated rapidly, whereas in
pseudoallergy, a diet must often be maintained for a minimum of 3 weeks before beneficial effects are observed.
Detailed information about dietary control can be found in
the referenced articles. However, it should be pointed out
that success rates may vary considerably due to regional differences in food and dietary habits. More research is necessary on the effect of foodstuffs in causing urticaria,
particularly in areas where the daily diet is greatly different
from the one in Western Europe.

Should patients with an allergic sensitization
(positive specific IgE/skin prick test) avoid certain food items?

We recommend that patients with a known sensitization
based on specific IgE to food should only avoid these food
items if there is relevant information e.g. double blind oral
provocation test or a clear history, to prove that the sensitization has a clinical relevance for urticaria (strong recommendation/high level of evidence).

in the

Are pseudoallergen-free diets useful
extended diagnostic program of chronic spontaneous urticaria?

We recommend the use of pseudoallergen (non-allergic-hypersensitivity reaction agents) free diets in the extended diagnostic program of chronic spontaneous urticaria in patients with
daily or almost daily symptoms only (strong recommendation/
high-quality evidence).

 

Inducing tolerance

Inducing tolerance can be useful in some subtypes of urticaria. Examples are cold urticaria, cholinergic urticaria, and
solar urticaria, where even a rush therapy with UV-A has

EAACI/GA?LEN/EDF/WAO urticaria guideline

been proven to be effective within 3 days (93). However, tolerance induction is only lasting for a few days; thus, a consistent daily exposure to the stimulus just at threshold level is
required which, for example, in case of cold baths is often
not accepted by patients.

Symptomatic pharmacological treatment

The main option in therapies, however, aimed at symptomatic relief is to reduce the effect of mast cell mediators such
as histamine, PAF, and others on the target organs. Many
symptoms of urticaria are mediated primarily by the actions
of histamine on H1-receptors located on endothelial cells (the
wheal) and on sensory nerves (neurogenic flare and pruritus).
Thus, continuous treatment with H1-antihistamines is of eminent importance in the treatment for urticaria (safety data
are available for use of several years continuously). Continuous use of H1-antihistamines in chronic urticaria is supported
not only by the results of clinical trials (94, 95) but also by
the mechanism of action of these medications, that is, that
they are inverse agonists with preferential affinity for the
inactive state of the histamine H1-receptor and stabilize it in
this conformation, shifting the equilibrium toward the inactive state.

However, in some cases, especially of CSU, other mast cell
mediators (PAF, leukotrienes, cytokines) are also involved
and a pronounced cellular infiltrate including basophils, lymphocytes, and eosinophils may be observed (96). These may
respond completely to a brief burst of corticosteroid and
may be relatively refractory to antihistamines.

Antihistamines have been available for the treatment of
urticaria since the 1950s. However, the older first-generation
antihistamines have pronounced anticholinergic effects and
sedative actions on the central nervous system (CNS), which
last longer than 12 h, whereas the antipruritic effects last
only for 4-6 h. Consequently, many interactions have been
described for these sedating antihistamines with alcohol and
drugs affecting the CNS, such as analgesics, hypnotics, sedatives, and mood-elevating drugs. In addition, first-generation
antihistamines can interfere with rapid eye movement sleep
and impact on learning and performance. In the recent
GA’LEN position paper (97), it is strongly recommended
not to use first-generation antihistamines any longer in
allergy both for adults and especially children. This view is
shared by the WHO guideline Allergic Rhinitis and its
Impact on Asthma (ARIA) (98). In this guideline, we thus
recommend against the use of these sedating antihistamines
for the routine management of chronic urticaria as first-line
agents, except for the rare places worldwide in which modern
second-generation antihistamines are not available. This recommendation is based on strong evidence regarding potential
serious side-effects of old sedating antihistamines (lethal overdoses have been reported) and the availability of modern second-generation antihistamines worldwide at low costs, which
not only lack these side-effects but also have a higher efficacy
and duration of action. The side-effects of first-generation
Hl-antihistamines are most pronounced in promethazine,
diphenhydramine, ketotifen, and chlorpheniramine and are
well understood. They penetrate the blood-brain barrier,

Allergy 69 (2014) 868-887 © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 877
EAACI/GA?LEN/EDF/WAO urticaria guideline

bind to H1-receptors in the CNS, and interfere with the neurotransmitter effects of histamine. Positron-emission tomography studies document their penetration into the human
brain and provide a new standard whereby CNS H1-receptor
occupancy can be related directly to effects on CNS function
(99). Impairment is particularly prominent during multitasking and performance of complex sensorimotor tasks such as
driving.

Old first-generation H1-antihistamines are a particular concern in the elderly in whom they increase the risk of impaired
cognition, inattention, disorganized speech, altered consciousness, and falls. The doses of drugs such as diphenhydramine,
hydroxyzine, and doxepin, used in urticaria, are massive
compared with the doses actually proven to be effective for
the treatment of insomnia (i.e., to produce sedation), for
example doxepin 3 mg.

The development of modern second-generation antihistamines led to drugs which are minimally or not sedating and
free of anticholinergic effects. However, two of the earlier
modern second-generation drugs, astemizole and terfenadine,
which were essentially pro-drugs requiring hepatic metabolism to become fully active, had cardiotoxic effects if this
metabolism was blocked by concomitant administration of
ketoconazole or erythromycin. These two drugs are no longer
available in most countries, and we recommend that they are
not used.

Further progress with regard to drug safety was achieved
by the development of the newer modern second-generation
antihistamines cetirizine (metabolite of hydroxyzine), loratadine, and fexofenadine, some of which are mostly nonsedating metabolites of earlier sedative antihistamines. More
recently, acrivastine, azelastine, bepotastine, bilastine, desloratadine, the active metabolite of loratadine, ebastine, epinastine, levocetirizine, the active enantiomer of cetirizine,
mequitanzine, mizolastine, olopatadine, and rupatadine (99)
have been added to the list of modern second-generation
antihistamines. Many of these antihistamines have not been
appropriately studied in urticaria, and there are considerable
clinical differences between them. Only seven of them (cetirizine, desloratadine, fexofenadine, levocetirizine, loratadine,
rupatadine, and bilastine) have been tested in detail in urticaria. Taken together, modern second-generation antihistamines should be considered as the first-line symptomatic
treatment for urticaria because of their good safety profile.
However, up to date, well-designed clinical trials comparing
the efficacy and safety of modern second-generation H1-antihistamines in CSU are largely lacking.

 

Are modern second generation H1-antihistamines to be preferred over first generation H1antihistamines in treatment of urticaria?

We recommend that modern second generation H1-antihistamines are to be preferred over first generation H1-antihistamines in the treatment of urticaria (strong recommendation/
high level of evidence).

 

Zuberbier et al.

Are modern second generation H1-antihistamines first line treatment in urticaria and to be
preferred against other licensed medication?

We recommend that modern second generation H1-antihistamines are to be used as first line treatment of urticaria (strong
recommendation/high level of evidence)

 

There are numerous studies showing the benefit of a
higher dosage of antihistamines in individual patients (100102) corroborating earlier studies which came to the same
conclusion employing first-generation antihistamines (103,
104). This has been verified in studies using up to fourfold
higher than recommended doses of bilastine, cetirizine, desloratadine, levocetirizine, fexofenadine, and rupatadine (100,
101, 105-107).

Furthermore, a recent study showed the benefit of using
desloratadine and levocetirizine at doses up to fourfold
higher than the recommended dose in the majority of
patients (105).

In summary, these studies suggest that the majority of
patients with urticaria not responding to single dose will
profit from up-dosing of antihistamines. Modern second-generation antihistamines at licenced doses are first-line treatment in urticaria, and updosing is second-line treatment
(Fig. 2).

Is an increase in the dose to fourfold of modern
second generation H1-antihistamines useful as
second line treatment and to be preferred over
other treatments in urticaria?

We recommend a trial of up to fourfold dose of modern
second generation H1-antihistamines as second-line in the
algorithm of treatment.

Should modern second generation H1-antihistamines be taken regularly or as needed?

We recommend modern second generation oral H1-antihistamines to be taken continuously in the lowest necessary dose
rather than on demand (strong recommendation/high-quality
evidence).

 

Should different H1-antihistamines be used at
the same time?

We recommend preferably to updose modern second genera
tion oral H1-antihistamines that do not cause sedation up to
fourfold (strong recommendation/high-quality evidence) instead
of combining different H1-antihistamines at the same time
(strong recommendation/low-quality evidence).

 

878 Allergy 69 (2014) 868-887 © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Zuberbier et al.

 

First line:
Modern second generation antihistamines

 

 

 

If symptoms persist
after 2 weeks

 

Second line:

Increase dosage up to fourfold of modern second
generation antihistamines

 

 

 

If symptoms persist
after 1-4 further weeks

 

Third line:

Add on to second line’: Omalizumab or Ciclosporin
A or Montelukast

Short course (max 10 days) of corticosteroids may
also be used at all times if exacerbations demand this

 

 

 

Figure 2 Recommended treatment algorithm for urticaria. *The
order of third-line treatments does not reflect preference. First
line = High-quality evidence: Low cost and worldwide availability
(e.g., modern second-generation antihistamines exist also in developing countries mostly cheaper than old sedating Antihistamines),
per daily dose as the half-life time is much longer, very good safety
profile, good efficacy. Second line = high-quality evidence: Low
cost, good safety profile, good efficacy. Third line as add-on to AH.
Ciclosporin A = High-quality evidence: Medium to high cost, moderate safety profile, good efficacy. Omalizumab = High-quality evidence: High cost, very good safety profile, very good efficacy.
Montelukast = Low quality evidence: Low cost, good safety, low
efficacy. Short course of corticosteroids = Low quality evidence:
Low cost, worldwide availability, good safety profile (for short
course only), good efficacy during intake, but very low for lasting
efficacy.

If there is no improvement, should higher than
fourfold doses of H1-antihistamines be used?

We recommend to preferably updose modern second genera
tion H1-antihistamines that do not cause sedation up to fourfold (strong recommendation/high-quality evidence) and to not
further increase the dose.

 

Further therapeutic possibilities for antihistamines refractory
patients

Omalizumab (anti-IgE) has now been shown to be very effective in the treatment for CSU, both in case reports and case
series as well as in double-blind placebo-controlled studies in

EAACI/GA?LEN/EDF/WAO urticaria guideline

antihistamine refractory selected patients (108-118). Omalizumab has also been reported (case reports and small series)
to be effective in cholinergic urticaria (119), cold urticaria
(120), solar urticaria (121), heat urticaria (122), symptomatic
dermographism (123), and delayed pressure urticaria (124).
For an overview in inducible urticaria, see Metz et al (125).
Omalizumab is effective already in doses from 150 to 300 mg
per month, often independently from total serum IgE (126).

Is omalizumab useful in the treatment of
patients unresponsive to high doses of H1-antihistamines as third-line treatment?

We recommend a trial of omalizumab as add on therapy to
modern second generation H1-antihistamines as third-line in
the algorithm of treatment of urticaria (strong recommendation/high level of evidence).

 

Ciclosporin A also has a moderate, direct effect on mast
cell mediator release (127, 128). Ciclosporin A has now been
shown to be effective in double-blind placebo-controlled
studies and is the only agent of this type to inhibit basophil
histamine release. Efficacy of ciclosporin A in combination
with a modern second-generation H1-antihistamine has been
shown in placebo-controlled trials (129, 130) as well as open
controlled trials (131), but this drug cannot be recommended
as standard treatment due to a high incidence of adverse
effects (130). It is recommended only for patients with severe
disease refractory to any dose of antihistamine, but ciclosporin A has a far better risk/benefit ratio compared with longterm use of steroids.

Is ciclosporin A useful as add on treatment in
patients unresponsive to high doses of H1antihistamines as third-line treatment?

We recommend a trial of ciclosporin A as add on therapy to
modern second generation H1-antihistamines as third-line in
the algorithm of treatment of urticaria (strong recommendation/high level of evidence).

 

Some older RCTs have assessed the use of antileukotrienes. Studies are difficult to compare due to different populations studied, for example, inclusion of only aspirin and food
additive intolerant patients or exclusion of ASST-positive
patients. In general, the level of evidence for the efficacy of
leukotriene receptor antagonists in urticaria is low but best
for montelukast.

Should leukotriene antagonists be used in the
third line treatment of urticaria?

We suggest a trial of montelukast as add on therapy to mod
ern second generation H1-antihistamines as third-line in the
treatment of urticaria (weak recommendation/low level of
evidence).

 

Allergy 69 (2014) 868-887 © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 879
EAACI/GA?LEN/EDF/WAO urticaria guideline

At present, topical corticosteroids are frequently successfully used in many allergic diseases, but in urticaria, topical
steroids are not helpful (with the possible exception of pressure urticaria on soles as alternative therapy with low evidence). If systemic corticosteroids are used, doses between 20
and 50 mg/day are required with obligatory side-effects on
long-term use. There is a strong recommendation against the
long-term use of corticosteroids outside specialist clinics if it
can be avoided. Depending on the country, it must be noted
that steroids are also not licensed for chronic urticaria (e.g.,
in Germany prednisolone is only licenced for acute urticaria).
For acute urticaria and acute exacerbations of CSU, a short
course of oral corticosteroids, that is, treatment of a maximum of up to 10 days, may, however, be helpful to reduce
disease duration/activity (132, 133). Nevertheless, welldesigned randomized clinical trials are lacking.

Should oral corticosteroids be used in the treatment of urticaria?

We recommend against the long-term use of systemic corticosteroids in urticaria (strong recommendation/high level of

evidence).

and

We suggest a trial of a short course of systemic corticosteroids in urticaria as third-line therapy or as an option for acute
exacerbation (weak recommendation/low level of evidence)

While antihistamines at up to quadruple the manufacturers’ recommended dosages will control symptoms in the
majority of patients with urticaria in general practice, alternative treatments are needed for the remaining unresponsive
patients. Before changing to an alternative therapy, it is recommended to wait for 1-4 weeks to allow full effectiveness.

As the severity of urticaria may fluctuate, and as spontaneous remission may occur at any time, it is also recommended
to re-evaluate the necessity for continued or alternative drug
treatment every 3-6 months.

Except for omalizumab and ciclosporin A, which both have
restrictions due to their high cost, many of the alternative
methods of treatment, such as combinations of modern second-generation Hl-antihistamines with antileukotrienes, are
based on clinical trials with low levels of evidence (Table 5).
Based on the level of evidence, the recommended third-line
treatment options are thus limited (see algorithm Fig. 2).

For H -antagonists and dapsone, still recommended in the
previous version of the guideline, the evidence is too low to
maintain this as recommendable in the algorithm, but they
may still have relevance as they are very affordable in some
poorer healthcare systems. For sulfasalazine, methotrexate,
interferon, plasmapheresis, phototherapy, and intravenous
immunoglobulins (IVIG) only trials of low quality or case
series have been published (2) (Table 5).

Antagonists of tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-alpha) (134)
and IVIG (135-138), which have been successfully used in
case reports, are recommended currently only to be used in
specialized centers as last option (i.e., anti-TNF-alpha for
delayed pressure urticaria and IVIG for CSU).

 

Zuberbier et al.

Phototherapy has been successfully used in mastocytosis and
is helpful in treatment-resistant patients with this condition
(139). For the treatment of CSU and symptomatic dermographism, UV-A, PUVA, and UV-B (nb-UVB) treatment for 13 months can be added to antihistamine treatment (140-142).
On the other hand, some treatment alternatives formerly
proposed have been shown to be ineffective in double-blind,
placebo-controlled studies and should no longer be used in
the average patient (although grade of recommendation is
low). These include tranexamic acid and sodium cromoglicate
in CSU (143, 144), nifedipine in symptomatic dermographism/urticaria factitia (145), and colchicine and indomethacin in delayed pressure urticaria (146, 147). However, more
research may be needed for patient subgroups, because
recently (63) a pilot study of patients with elevated D-dimer
levels showed that tranexamic acid therapy may be effective.
This has been supported by other authors investigating anticoagulants in urticaria as pointed out above.

 

Treatment of special populations

Children

Many clinicians use first-generation, sedating H1-antihistamines as their first choice in the treatment for children with
allergies assuming that the safety profile of these drugs is better known than that of the modern second-generation H1antihistamines due to a longer life on the market. Also, the
use of modern second-generation H1-antihistamines is not
licenced for use in children <6 months of age, while the recommendation for the first-generation Hl-antihistamines is
sometimes less clear because these drugs were licenced at a
time when the code of 78 good clinical practice for the pharmaceutical industry was less stringent. As a consequence,
many doctors choose first-generation antihistamines which,
as pointed out above, have a lower safety profile compared
with modern second-generation H1-antihistamines. A strong
recommendation was made by the panel to discourage the
use of first-generation antihistamines in infants and children.
Thus, in children, the same first-line treatment and up-dosing
(weight adjusted) is recommended as in adults. Only medications with proven efficacy and safety in the pediatric population should be used. Cetirizine, desloratadine, fexofenadine,
levocetirizine, and loratadine have been well studied in children, and their long-term safety has been well established in
the pediatric population. In addition, the choice of the modern second-generation H1-antihistamine in children depends
on the age and availabilities as not all are available as syrup
or fast dissolving tablet suitable for children and the lowest
licenced age also differs from country to country. All further
steps should be based on individual considerations.

Should the same treatment algorithm be used
in children?

We suggest the same treatment algorithm to be used in
children with chronic urticaria (weak recommendation/clinical
consensus).

 

880 Allergy 69 (2014) 868-887 © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Zuberbier et al.

Pregnant and lactating women
The same considerations in principle apply to pregnant and
lactating women. On one hand, use of any systemic treatment
should generally be avoided in pregnant women, especially in
the first trimester. On the other hand, pregnant women have
the right to best possible therapy. While the safety of treatment has not been systematically studied in pregnant women
with urticaria, it should be pointed out that the possible negative effects of increased levels of histamine occurring in urticaria have also not been studied in pregnancy. Regarding
treatment, no reports of birth defects in women having used
modern second-generation antihistamines during pregnancy
have been reported to date. However, only small sample size
studies are available for cetirizine (148) and one large metaanalysis for loratadine (149). Furthermore, as several modern
second-generation antihistamines are now prescription free
and used widely in both allergic rhinitis and urticaria, it must
be assumed that many women have used these drugs especially in the beginning of pregnancy, at least before the pregnancy was confirmed. Nevertheless, as the highest safety is
mandatory in pregnancy, the suggestion for the use of modern second-generation antihistamines is to prefer loratadine
with the possible extrapolation to desloratadine and cetirizine
with a possible extrapolation to levocetirizine. All H1-antihistamines are excreted in breast milk in low concentrations.
Use of second-generation Hl-antihistamines is advised, as
nursing infants occasionally develop sedation from the old
first-generation H1-antihistamines transmitted in breast milk.
The increased dosage of modern second-generation antihistamines can only be carefully suggested in pregnancy
because safety studies have not been carried out, and with
loratadine, it must be remembered that this drug is metabo
Table 6 Areas of further research in urticaria

Global epidemiology, in adults and children

The socio-economic consequences

Identification of mast cell/basophil activating factors
Identification of new histological markers

Identification of serum biomarkers of urticarial activity/mast cell
activation

Determination of minimal important differences for instruments
that assess disease activity or impact relevant response (e.g.,
UAS, CU-Q2oL)

Clarification of the role of coagulation/coagulation factors in CSU

Development of commercially available in vitro tests for
detecting serum auto-antibodies for anti-lgE or anti-Fc&RI
Clarification of associated psychiatric/psychosomatic diseases
and their impact

Pathomechanisms in antihistamine-resistant urticaria/angioedema
Double-blind control trials comparing different modern secondgeneration anti-H1s in higher doses in CSU and different
subtypes of urticaria

Regular v. on demand use of anti-H1 antihistamines on the
duration of urticaria/severity of urticaria

Multicenter studies on the possible effect of anticoagulants (oral
and heparin derivatives) on CSU

Controlled multicenter trials on the possible effect of add-on of
anti-H2, montelukast, sulfone, methotrexate, azathioprine

EAACI/GA?LEN/EDF/WAO urticaria guideline

lized in the liver. First-generation agents may be cautiously
employed when symptoms dictate in the face of nonresponse
to modern second-generation antihistamines. Use of firstgeneration H1-antihistamines immediately before parturition
may cause respiratory depression and other adverse effects
in the neonate (the first-generation H1-antihistamines with
the best safety track record in pregnancy are chlorpheniramine and diphenhydramine). All further steps should be
based on individual considerations, with a preference for
medications that have a satisfactory risk-to-benefit ratio in
pregnant women and neonates with regard to teratogenicity
and embryo toxicity. For example, cyclosporine, although
not teratogenic, is embryo-toxic in animal models and is
associated with preterm delivery and low birth weight in
human infants (the median gestation duration of infants
born to mothers taking cyclosporine is 35.7 weeks, and the
median birth weight of their infants is 2.2 kg). Whether the
benefits of cyclosporine in chronic urticaria are worth, the
risks in pregnant women will have to be determined on a
case-by-case basis. However, all decisions should be reevaluated according to the current recommendations published by
regulatory authorities.

 

Should the same treatment algorithm be used
in pregnant women and during lactation?

We suggest the same treatment algorithm be used in pregnant women and during lactation in urticaria (weak recommendation/clinical consensus).

 

Need for further research

The panel and participants identified several areas in which
further research is needed. These points are summarized in
Table 6.

Acknowledgments

This guideline is the result of the formalized international
process involving, in addition to the four founder societies,
many societies and as such reflect an international compromise. National procedures as outlined by the individual participating societies in national guidelines may differ.
However, while worldwide harmonization of treatment is
only partly possible, a harmonization of nomenclature, classification, and management approaches is highly desirable. We
thank the AAAAI for their input, review and thoughtful
comments throughout the guidelines development process.
Two English-speaking patients were present during the Urticaria Guideline meetings.

Conflicts of interest

A complete declaration of the authors’ conflicts of interest is
presented in the online version of this paper (see Supporting
Information).

Allergy 69 (2014) 868-887 © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 881
EAACI/GA?LEN/EDF/WAO urticaria guideline

Supporting Information

Additional Supporting Information may be found in the

online version of this article:
Data S1. Voting results.
Data S2. Physicians and specialists who contributed to the

development of this revision and update of the guidelines by

References

lL.

10.

882

. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R.

Zuberbier T, Asero R, Bindslev-Jensen C,
Walter Canonica G, Church MK, Gime
nez-Arnau A et al. EAACI/GA°LEN/EDF/

WAO guideline: definition, classification
and diagnosis of urticaria. Allergy
2009;64: 1417-1426.

 

. Zuberbier T, Asero R, Bindslev-Jensen C,

Canonica WG, Church MK, Gimenez-Arnau AM et al. EAACI/GA7LEN/ED
WAO guideline: management of urticaria.
Allergy 2009;64:1427-1443.

 

. Zuberbier T, Greaves MW, Juhlin L, Ko
bza-Black A, Maurer D, Stingl G et al.
Definition, classification, and routine diag
 

nosis of urticaria: a consensus report. J
Investig Dermatol Symp Proc

2001;6:123-127.

. Zuberbier T, Greaves MW, Juhlin L, Merk

H, Sting! G, Henz BM. Management of
urticaria: a consensus report. J Investig
Dermatol Symp Proc 2001;6:128-131.

 

. Zuberbier T, Bindslev-Jensen C, Canonica

GW, Grattan CE, Greaves MW, Henz BM
et al. EAACI/GA?LEN/EDF guideline:
management of urticaria. Allergy
2006;61:321-331.

. Zuberbier T, Bindslev-Jensen C, Canonica

W, Grattan CE, Greaves MW, Henz BM
et al. EAACI/GA*LEN/EDF guideline:
definition, classification and diagnosis of
urticaria. Allergy 2006;61:316-320.

   

FalckYtter Y, Vist GE, Liberati A et al. Going
from evidence to recommendations. BMJ
2008;336: 1049-1051.

  

. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, Vist GE,

Falck-Ytter Y, Schunemann HJ. What is
“quality of evidence” and why is it important to clinicians? BMJ 2008; 2995-998.

 

. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, Kunz

R, Falck-Ytter Y, Alonso-Coello P et al.
GRADE: an emerging consensus on rating
quality of evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ 2008;336:924-926.
Brozek JL, Baena-Cagnani CE, Bonini S,
Canonica GW, Rasi G, van Wijk RG et al.
Methodology for development of the Allergic Rhinitis and its Impact on Asthma
guideline 2008 update. Allergy 2008;63:3846.

. Schunemann HJ, Jaeschke R, Cook DJ,

Bria WF, El-Solh AA, Ernst A et al. An

20.

- Bai:

Zuberbier et al.

active participation in the democratic process and discussion
within the 4th International Consensus Meeting on Urticaria

2012.

Data S3. Conflicts of interest.

official ATS statement: grading the quality
of evidence and strength of recommendations in ATS guidelines and recommendations. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2006;174:605-614.

Haas N, Schadendorf D, Henz BM. Differential endothelial adhesion molecule expression in early and late whealing reactions.
Int Arch Allergy Immunol 1998;115:210214.

 

  

. Peteiro C, Toribio J. Incidence of leukocyt
oclastic vasculitis in chronic idiopathic urticaria. Study of 100 cases. Am J
Dermatopathol 1989;11:528-533.

 

. Ito Y, Satoh T, Takayama K, Miyagishi C,

Walls AF, Yokozeki H. Basophil recruitment and activation in inflammatory skin
diseases. Allergy 2011;66:1107-1113.

. Zuberbier T, Schadendorf D, Haas N,

Hartmann K, Henz BM. Enhanced P-selectin expression in chronic and dermographic

 

urticaria. Int Arch Allergy Immunol
1997;114:86-89.

. Hermes B, Prochazka AK, Haas N, Jur
govsky K, Sticherling M, Henz BM. Upregulation of TNF-alpha and IL-3 expression
in lesional and uninvolved skin in different
types of urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol
1999:103(2 Pt 1):307-314.

. Greaves MW. Chronic urticaria. N Engl J

Med 1995;332:1767-1772.

. Kaplan AP. Clinical practice. Chronic urti
caria and angioedema. N Engl J Med
2002:346:175-179.

. Baiardini 1, Braido F, Bindslev-Jensen C,

Bousquet PJ, Brzoza Z, Canonica GW
et al. Recommendations for assessing
patient-reported outcomes and healthrelated quality of life in patients with
urticaria: a GA?LEN taskforce position
paper. Allergy 2011;66:840-844.
O'Donnell BF, Lawlor F, Simpson J,
Morgan M, Greaves MW. The impact of
chronic urticaria on the quality of life. Br
J Dermatol 1997:136:197-201.

dini I, Giardini A, Pasquali M, Dignetti P, Guerra L, Specchia C et al. Quality of life and patients’ satisfaction i

 

 

chronic urticaria and respiratory allergy.
Allergy 2003;58:621-623.

. Poon E, Seed PT, Greaves MW, Kobza
Black A. The extent and nature of disabil
24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29%:

30.

31.

ity in different urticarial conditions. Br J
Dermatol 1999;140:667-671.

. Baiardini 1, Pasquali M, Braido F,

Fumagalli F, Guerra L, Compalati E

et al. A new tool to evaluate the impact
of chronic urticaria on quality of life:
chronic urticaria quality of life questionnaire (CU-QoL). Allergy 2005;60:1073—
1078.

Dias GA, Pires GV, Valle SO, Franca AT,
Papi JA, Dortas SD Jr et al. Cross-cultural
adaptation of the Brazilian-Portuguese verof-life

 

sion of the chronic urticaria quality:
questionnaire — CU-Q2oL. Allergy
2011;66:1487-1493.

Mlynek A, Magerl M, Hanna M, Lhachimi
S, Baiardini I, Canonica GW et al. The
German version of the Chronic Urticaria

 

Quality-of-Life Questionnaire: factor analysis, validation, and initial clinical findings.
Allergy 2009;64:927-936.

Valero A, Herdman M, Bartra J, Ferrer M,
Jauregui I, Davila I et al. Adaptation and
validation of the Spanish version of the
Chronic Urticaria Quality of Life Questionnaire (CU-Q2oL). J Investig Allergol Clin
Immunol 2008;18:426-432.

Kocaturk E, Weller K, Martus P, Aktas S,
Kavala M, Sarigul S et al. Turkish version
quality of life ques
  

of the chronic urtic:
tionnaire: cultural adaptation, assessment
of reliability and validity. Acta Derm Venereol 2012:92:419-425.

Brzoza Z, Badura-Brzoza K, Mlynek A,
Mager! M, Baiardini I, Canonica GW et al.
Adaptation and initial results of the Polish
version of the GA*LEN chronic urticaria
quality of life questionnaire (CU-Q(2)oL).
J Dermatol Sci 2011:62:36-41.

Weller K, Groffik A, Magerl M, Tohme N,
Martus P, Krause K et al. Development,
validation, and initial results of the angioedema activity score. Allergy 2013;68:1185—
1192.

Mlynek A, Zalewska-Janowska A, Martus
P, Staubach P, Zuberbier T, Maurer M.
How to assess disease activity in patients
with chronic urticaria? Allergy 2008:63:777—
780.

Mathias SD, Crosby RD, Zazzali JL, Maurer M, Saini SS. Evaluating the minimally

 

important difference of the urticaria activity

Allergy 69 (2014) 868-887 © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Zuberbier et al.

we
is)

34.

score and other measures of disease activity
in patients with chronic idiopathic urticaria.
Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2012;108:20—
24.

 

. Zuberbier T, Maurer M. Urticaria: current

 

opinions about etiology, diagnosis and
therapy. Acta Derm Venereol 2007;87:196—
205.

33. Magerl MA, Altrichter S, Boodstein N,

Giizelbey O, KeBler B, Krause K et al.
Urticaria — classification and strategies for
diagnosis and treatment. CME Dermatol
2008;3:2-18.

Ventura MT, Napolitano S, Menga R, Cecere R, Asero R. Anisakis simplex hypersensitivity is associated with chronic
urticaria in endemic areas. Int Arch Allergy
Immunol 2013;160:297-300.

. Daschner A, Pascual CY. Anisakis simplex:

sensitization and clinical allergy. Curr Opin
Allergy Clin Immunol 2005;5:281-285.

36. Juhlin L. Recurrent urticaria — clinical

37.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

investigation of 330 patients. Br J Dermatol
1981;104:369-381.

Zuberbier T, Chantraine-Hess $, Hartmann
K, Czarnetzki BM. Pseudoallergen-free diet
in the treatment of chronic urticaria — a
prospective study. Acta Derm Venereol
1995;75:484-487.

- Hide M, Francis DM, Grattan CE, Hakimi

J, Kochan JP, Greaves MW. Autoantibodies against the high-affinity IgE receptor as
a cause of histamine-release in chronic urticaria. N Engl J Med 1993;328:1599-1604.

. Fiebiger E, Hammerschmid F, Stingl G,

Maurer D. Anti-FcepsilonRlalpha autoantibodies in autoimmune-mediated disorders.
Identification of a structure-function relationship. J Clin Invest 1998;101:243-251.
Buhner S, Reese I, Kuehl F, Lochs H,
Zuberbier T. Pseudoallergic reactions in
chronic urticaria are associated with altered
gastroduodenal permeability. Allergy
2004:59: 1118-1123.

Wedi B, Raap U, Kapp A. Chronic urticaria and infections. Curr Opin Allergy Clin
Immunol 2004;4:387-396.

Wedi B, Wagner S, Werfel T, Manns MP,
Kapp A. Prevalence of Helicobacter pyloriassociated gastritis in chronic urticaria. Int
Arch Allergy Immunol 1998:116:288-294.
Wedi B, Kapp A. Helicobacter pylori infection in skin diseases: a critical appraisal.
Am J Clin Dermatol 2002;3:273-282.
Altrichter S, Peter HJ, Pisarevskaja D, Metz
M, Martus P, Maurer M. IgE mediated
autoallergy against thyroid peroxidase-a
novel pathomechanism of chronic spontaneous urticaria? PLoS ONE 2011;6:e14794.
Magerl M, Borzova E, Gimenez-Arnau A,
Grattan CE, Lawlor F, Mathelier-Fusade P
et al. The definition and diagnostic testing
of physical and cholinergic urticarias—

46.

47.

48.

49.

Sl.

352.

54.

55:

56.

Bye

EAACI/GA*LEN /EDF/UNEV consensus
panel recommendations. Allergy
2009;64:1715-1721.

Foti C, Nettis E, Cassano N, Di Mundo I,
Vena GA. Acute allergic reactions to Anisakis simplex after ingestion of anchovies.
Acta Derm Venereol 2002;82:121-123.
Chen YJ, Wu CY, Shen JL, Chen TT,
Chang YT. Cancer risk in patients with
chronic urticaria: a population-based cohort
study. Arch Dermatol 2012:148:103-108.
Sabroe RA, Grattan CE, Francis DM, Barr
RM, Kobza-Black A, Greaves MW. The
autologous serum skin test: a screening test
for autoantibodies in chronic idiopathic
urticaria. Br J Dermatol 1999;140:446-452.
Asero R, Tedeschi A, Lorini M, Salimbeni
R, Zanoletti T, Miadonna A. Chronic
urticaria: novel clinical and serological
aspects. Clin Exp Allergy 2001;31:1105—
1110.

  

50. Asero R, Tedeschi A, Lorini M. Autoreac
tivity is highly prevalent in patients with
multiple intolerances to NSAIDs. Ann
Allergy Asthma Immunol 2002;88:468-472.
Confino-Cohen R, Aharoni D, Goldberg
A, Gurevitch I, Buchs A, Weiss M et al.
Evidence for aberrant regulation of the
p21Ras pathway in PBMCs of patients

_ J Allergy

 

with chronic idiopathic urtic:
Clin Immunol 2002;109:349-356.

Metz M, Gimenez-Arnau A, Borzova E,
Grattan CE, Magerl M, Maurer M. Frequency and clinical implications of skin
autoreactivity to serum versus plasma in
patients with chronic urticaria. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 2009;123:705-706.

. Guttman-Yassky E, Bergman R, Maor C,

Mamorsky M, Pollack S, Shahar E. The
autologous serum skin test in a cohort of
chronic idiopathic urticaria patients compared to respiratory allergy patients and
healthy individuals. J Eur Acad Dermatol
Venereol 2007;21:35-39.

Jang AS, Park JS, Lee JH, Park SW, Kim
DJ, Park CS. Autologous serum skin test
for autoantibodies is associated with airway

 

hyperresponsiveness in patients with
asthma. Respiration 2007;74:293-296.

Comi AL, Tedeschi A, Lorini M, Miadonna A. Novel clinical and serological aspects
in non-allergic asthma. Respir Med
2007;101:2526-2533.

Tedeschi A, Comi AL, Lorini M, Tosini C,
Miadonna A. Autologous serum skin test
reactivity in patients with non-allergic
asthma. Clin Exp Allergy 2005;35:849-853.
Grattan CE, Wallington TB, Warin RP,
Kennedy CT, Bradfield JW. A serological
mediator in chronic idiopathic urticaria — a
clinical, immunological and histologicalevaluation. Br J Dermatol 1986;114:583—
590.

Allergy 69 (2014) 868-887 © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd

EAACI/GA?LEN/EDF/WAO urticaria guideline

58.

59.

60.

6l.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

Niimi N, Francis DM, Kermani F,
O'Donnell BF, Hide M, Kobza-Black A

et al. Dermal mast cell activation by
autoantibodies against the high affinity IgE
receptor in chronic urticaria. J Investig
Dermatol 1996;106:1001-1006.

Fagiolo U, Cancian M, Bertollo L, Peserico
A, Amadori A. Inhibitory effect of heparin
on skin reactivity to autologous serum in
chronic idiopathic urticaria. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 1999;103:1143-1147.

Asero R, Tedeschi A, Lorini M, Caldironi
ith multiple drug allergy syndrome contain circu
 

G, Barocci F. Sera from patients

lating histamine-releasing factors. Int Arch
Allergy Immunol 2003;131:195-200.

Mari A. Allergy-like asthma and rhinitis. A
cross-sectional survey of a respiratory
cohort and a diagnos
autologous serum skin test. Int Arch
Allergy Immunol 2004;133:29-39.
Konstantinou GN, Asero R, Maurer M,
Sabroe RA, Schmid-Grendelmeier P,
Grattan CE. EAACI/GA°LEN Position
Paper: the autologous serum skin test in

ic approach using the

  

urticaria: literature review and consensus
panel recommendations. Allergy

2009;64: 1256-1268.

Asero R, Tedeschi A, Cugno M. Heparin
and tranexamic Acid therapy may be effec
 

tive in treatment-resistant chronic urticaria
with elevated d-dimer: a pilot study. Int
Arch Allergy Immunol 2010;152:384-389.
Siebenhaar F, Staubach P, Metz M, Mager!
M, Jung J, Maurer M. Peltier effect-based
temperature challenge: an improved method
for diagnosing cold urticaria. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2004;114:1224-1225.

Mlynek A, Magerl M, Siebenhaar F, Weller
K, Vieira Dos Santos R, Zuberbier T et al.
Results and relevance of critical temperature threshold testing in patients with
acquired cold urticaria. Br J Dermatol
2010;162: 198-200.

Mlynek A, Vieira dos Santos R, Ardelean
E, Weller K, Magerl M, Church MK et al.
A novel, simple, validated and reproducible
instrument for assessing provocation
threshold levels in patients with symptomatic dermographism. Clin Exp Dermatol
2013;38:360-366.

Lawlor F, Black AK. Delayed pressure
urticaria. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am
2004;24:247-258, vi-vii.

Gimenez-Arnau A, Maurer M, De La Cuadra J, Maibach H. Immediate contact skin
reactions, an update of Contact Urticaria,
Contact Urticaria Syndrome and Protein
Contact Dermatitis — “A Never Ending
Story”. Eur J Dermatol 2010;20:552-562.
Grattan CE, Dawn G, Gibbs S, Francis
DM. Blood basophil numbers in chronic
ordinary urticaria and healthy controls:

883
EAACI/GA?LEN/EDF/WAO urticaria guideline

diurnal variation, influence of loratadine

and prednisolone and relationship to dis
ease activity. Clin Exp Allergy 2003;33:337—

341.

Eckman JA, Hamilton RG, Gober LM,

Sterba PM, Saini SS. Basophil phenotypes

idiopathic urticaria in relation to

tivity and autoantibodies. J Invest
Dermatol 2008;128:1956-1963.

71. Bailey E, Shaker M. An update on child
hood urticaria and angioedema. Curr Opin

Pediatr 2008;20:425-430.

Novembre E, Cianferoni A, Mori F, Barni

70.

 

72.
S, Calogero C, Bernardini R et al. Urticaria
and urticaria related skin condition/disease
in children. Eur Ann Allergy Clin Immunol
2008;40:

. Ehlers I, Niggemann B, Binder C, Zuberbi
er T. Role of nonallergic hypersensitivity

reactions in children with chronic urticaria.

Allergy 1998;53:1074-1077.

Legrain V, Taieb A, Sage T, Maleville J.

Urticaria in infants: a study of forty

patients. Pediatr Dermatol 1990;7:101-107.

. Greaves MW. Chronic urticaria in child
hood. Allergy 2000;55:309-320.

Bousquet J, Bachert C, Canonica GW,

Casale TB, Cruz AA, Lockey RJ et al.

Unmet needs in severe chronic upper air
way disease (SCUAD). J Allergy Clin

Immunol 2009;124:428-433.

Bousquet J, Mantzouranis E, Cruz AA,

Ait-Khaled N, Baena-Cagnani CE, Bleecker

ER et al. Uniform definition of asthma

 

74,

76.

Ts

severity, control, and exacerbations:
document presented for the World Health
Organization Consultation on Severe
Asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2010;126:926-938.

Mathelier-Fusade P. Drug-induced urticarias. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol 2006;30:19—
23.

Shakouri A, Compalati E, Lang DM, Khan
DA. Effectiveness of Helicobacter pylori
eradic:

78.

79.

 

   

‘ion in chronic urticaria: evidence
 

based analysis using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development,
and Evaluation system. Curr Opin Allergy
Clin Immunol 2010;10:362-369.

Wedi B, Raap U, Wieczorek D, Kapp A.
Urticaria and infections. Allergy Asthma
Clin Immunol 2009;5:10.

81. Liutu M, Kalimo K, Uksila J, Kalimo H.
Etiologic aspects of chronic urticaria. Int J
Dermatol 1998:;37:515-519.

Di Campli C, Gasbarrini A, Nucera E,
Franceschi F, Ojetti V, Sanz Torre E et al.

80.

82.

Beneficial effects of Helicobacter pylori
eradication on idiopathic chronic urticaria.
Dig Dis Sci 1998;43:1226-1229.

. Baskan EB, Turker T, Gulten M, Tunali S.
Lack of correlation between Helicobacter
pylori infection and autologous serum skin

884

84,

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

ol.

92.

93.

94,

95.

96.

test in chronic idiopathic urticaria. Jnt J 97.
Dermatol 2005;44:993-995.

Henz BM, Zuberbier T. Causes of urticaria.
In: Henz BM, Zuberbier T, Grabbe J,
Monroe E, editors. Urticaria — clinical,
diagnostic and therapeutic aspects. Berlin: 98.
Springer Verlag, 1998:19-38.

Champion RH, Roberts SO, Carpenter
RG, Roger JH. Urticaria and angiooedema. A review of 554 patients. Br J
Dermatol 1969;81:588-597.

Bruno G, Andreozzi P, Graf U. Exerciseinduced urticaria—angioedema syndrome: a 99.
role in gastroesophageal reflux. In: Vena

GA, Puddu P, editors. Proceedings of the
International Symposium on Urticaria. Bari:

Publ Scientif 1998;85-89.

Grattan CE, Francis DM, Slater NG, Bar
low RJ, Greaves MW. Plasmapher
severe, unremitting, chronic urticaria. Lancet 1992;339:1078-1080.

Pfrommer C, Bast! R, Vieths S, Ehlers I,
Henz BM, Zuberbier T. Characterization of

naturally occurring pseudoallergens causing

for

 

100.

101.
chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol
1996;97:367.

Pigatto PD, Valsecchi RH. Chronic urticaria: a mystery. Allergy 2000;55:306-308.
Bunselmeyer B, Laubach HJ, Schiller M,
Stanke M, Luger TA, Brehler R. Incremental build-up food challenge-a new diagnostic approach to evaluate pseudoallergic

102.

reactions in chronic urticaria: a pilot study: 103.
stepwise food challenge in chronic urticaria.
Clin Exp Allergy 2009;39:116-126.

Akoglu G, Atakan N, Cakir B, Kalayci O,

Hayran M. Effects of low pseudoallergen

104.

diet on urticarial activity and leukotriene
levels in chronic urticaria. Arch Dermatol
Res 2012;304:257-262.

Nettis E, Colanardi MC, Ferrannini A,
Tursi A. Sodium benzoate-induced repeated

105.

episodes of acute urticaria/angio-oedema:
randomized controlled trial. Br J Dermatol
2004;:151:898-902.

Beissert S, Stander H, Schwarz T. UVA
rush hardening for the treatment of solar
urticaria. J Am Acad Dermatol 106.
2000:42: 1030-1032.

Grob JJ, Auquier P, Dreyfus I, Ortonne
JP. How to prescribe antihistamines for
chronic idiopathic urticaria: desloratadine
daily vs PRN and quality of life. Allergy
2009;64:605-612.

Weller K, Ardelean E, Scholz E, Martus P,
Zuberbier T, Maurer M. Can on-demand
non-sedating antihistamines improve urti- 107.
caria symptoms? A double-blind, random
ized, single-dose study Acta Derm Venereol
2013;93:168-174.

Vonakis BM, Saini SS. New concepts in

chronic urticaria. Curr Opin Immunol
2008:20:709-716.

Zuberbier et al.

Church MK, Maurer M, Simons FE,
Bindslev-Jensen C, van Cauwenberge P,
Bousquet J et al. Risk of first-generation H
())-antihistamines: a GA?LEN position
paper. Allergy 2010;65:459-466.

Bousquet J, Khaltaev N, Cruz AA, Denburg J, Fokkens WJ, Togias A et al. Allergic Rhinitis and its Impact on Asthma
(ARIA) 2008 update (in collaboration with
the World Health Organization, GA7LEN
and AllerGen). Allergy 2008:63(Supp!
86):8-160.

Kubo N, Senda M, Ohsumi Y, Sakamoto S,
Matsumoto K, Tashiro M et al. Brain histamine HI receptor occupancy of loratadine
measured by positron emission topography:
comparison of H1 receptor occupancy and
proportional impairment ratio. Hum Psychopharmacol 2011:26:133-139.

Kontou-Fili K, Paleologos G, Herakleous

 

M. Suppression of histamine-induced skin
reactions by loratadine and cetirizine diHCl.
Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1989;36:617-619.
Zuberbier T, Munzberger C, Haustein U,
Trippas E, Burtin B, Mariz SD et al. Double-blind crossover study of high-dose cetirizine in cholinergic urticaria. Dermatology
1996;193:324-327.

K, Maniatakou G, Demaka P,
Paleologos G. Therapeutic effect of cetiri
 

Kontou
zine 2 HCI in delayed pressure urticaria.
Health Sci Rev 1989;3:23-25.

Wanderer AA, Ellis
urticaria with cyproheptadine. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 1971;48:366-371.

Kaplan AP, Gray L, Shaff RE, Horakova
Z, Beaven MA. In vivo studies of mediator

*. Treatment of cold

 

release in cold urticaria and cholinergic
urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol
1975;55:394-402.

Staevska M, Popov TA, Kralimarkova T,
Lazarova C, Kraeva $, Popova D et al.
The effectiveness of levocetirizine and
desloratadine in up to 4 times conventional doses in difficult-to-treat urticaria.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;125:
676-682.

Siebenhaar F, Degener F, Zuberbier T,
Martus P, Maurer M. High-dose desloratadine decreases wheal volume and
improves cold provocation thresholds
compared with standard-dose treatment in
patients with acquired cold urticaria: a
randomized, placebo-controlled, crossover
study. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2009;123:672-679.

Gimenez-Arnau A, Izquierdo I, Maurer M.
The use of a responder analysis to identify
clinically meaningful differences in chronic
urticaria patients following placebo- con
 

trolled treatment with rupatadine 10 and
20 mg. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
2009;23: 1088-1091.

Allergy 69 (2014) 868-887 © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Zuberbier et al.

108.

109.

110.

11.

113.

114.

115.

116.

117.

118.

119.

120.

121.

Spector SL, Tan RA. Effect of omalizumab on
patients with chronic urticaria. Ann Allergy
Asthma Immunol 2007;99:190-193.

Kaplan AP. Treatment of chronic spontaneous urticaria. Allergy Asthma Immunol
Res 2012;4:326-331.

Metz M, Maurer M. Omalizumab in
chronic urticaria. Curr Opin Allergy Clin
Immunol 2012:12:406-411.

Ivyanskiy I, Sand C, Francis ST. Omalizumab for chronic urticaria: a case series

 

 

and overview of the literature. Case Rep
Dermatol 2012;4:19-26.

2. Buyukozturk S, Gelincik A, Demirturk M,

Kocaturk E, Colakoglu B, Dal M. Omalizumab markedly improves urticaria activity
scores and quality of life scores in chronic
spontaneous urticaria patients: a real life
survey. J Dermatol 2012;39:439-442.

Godse KY. Omalizumab in treatment-resistant chronic spontaneous urticaria. Indian J
Dermatol 2011;56:444.

Magerl M, Staubach P, Altrichter S,
Ardelean E, Krause K, Metz M et al.
Effective treatment of therapy-resistant
chronic spontaneous urticaria with omalizumab. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2010;126:665-666.

Gober LM, Sterba PM, Eckman JA, Saini
SS. Effect of Anti-[gE (Omalizumab) in
chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU) patients.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 2008:121:S147.
Saini S, Rosen KE, Hsieh HJ, Wong DA,
Conner E, Kaplan A et al. A randomized,
placebo-controlled, dose-ranging study of
single-dose omalizumab in patients with
H-1-antihistamine-refractory chronic
idiopathic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2011;128:567-573.

Maurer M, Altrichter S, Bieber T, Biedermann T, Brautigam M, Seyfried $ et al.
Efficacy and safety of omalizumab in
patients with chronic urticaria who exhibit
IgE against thyroperoxidase. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2011;128:202-209.

Groffik A, Mitzel-Kaoukhov H, Magerl M,
Maurer M, Staubach P. Omalizumab — an
effective and safe treatment of therapyresistant chronic spontaneous urticaria.
Allergy 2011;66:303-305.

Metz M, Bergmann P, Zuberbier T, Maurer M. Successful treatment of cholinergic
urticaria with anti-immunoglobulin E therapy. Allergy 2008;63:247-249.

Boyce JA. Successful treatment of cold
 
 

induced urticaria/anaphylaxis with anti-IgE.
J Allergy Clin Inmunol 2006;117:1415—
1418,

Guzelbey O, Ardelean E, Magerl M,
Zuberbier T, Maurer M, Metz M.
Successful treatment of solar urticaria with
anti-immunoglobulin E therapy. Allergy
2008;63:1563-1565.

122.

125.

129.

130.

131.

132.

133.

134.

Bullerkotte U, Wieczorek D, Kapp A,
Wedi B. Effective treatment of refractory
severe heat urticaria with omalizumab.
Allergy 2010;65:931-932.

. Krause K, Ardelean E, Kessler B, Mager!

M, Metz M, Siebenhaar F et al. Antihistamine-resistant urticaria factitia successfully
treated with anti-immunoglobulin E therapy. Allergy 2010;65:1494-1495.

. Bindslev-Jensen C, Skov PS. Efficacy of

omalizumab in delayed pressure urticari
case report. Allergy 2010;65:138-139.
Metz M, Altrichter S, Ardelean E, Kessler
B, Krause K, Mager! M et al. Anti-immunoglobulin E treatment of patients with

 

recalcitrant physical urticaria. Int Arch
Allergy Immunol 2011;154:177-180.

Saini S, Rosen KE, Hsieh HJ, Wong DA,
Conner E, Kaplan A et al. A randomized,
placebo-controlled, dose-ranging study of
single-dose omalizumab in patients with
H1-antihistamine-refractory chronic
idiopathic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2011;128:567-573.

. Stellato C, de Paulis A, Ciccarelli A, Cirillo

R, Patella V, Casolaro V et al. Anti-inflammatory effect of cyclosporin A on human
skin mast cells. J Invest Dermatol
1992:98:800-804..

. Harrison CA, Bastan R, Peirce MJ,

Munday MR, Peachell PT. Role of calcineurin in the regulation of human lung
mast cell and basophil function by cyclosporine and FK506. Br J Pharmacol
2007;150:509-S18.

Grattan CE, O’Donnell BF, Francis DM,
Niimi N, Barlow RJ, Seed PT et al. Randomized double-blind study of cyclosporin
in chronic ‘idiopathic’ urticaria. Br J Dermatol 2000;143:365—372.

Vena GA, Cassano N, Colombo D, Peruzzi
E, Pigatto P. Cyclosporine in chronic idiopathic urticaria: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. J Am Acad
Dermatol! 2006;55:705—709.

Doshi DR, Weinberger MM. Experience
with cyclosporine in children with chronic
idiopathic urticaria. Pediatr Dermatol
2009;26:409-413.

Zuberbier T, Ifflander J, Semmler C, Henz
BM. Acute urticari:

 

linical aspects and
therapeutic responsiveness. Acta Derm
Venereol 1996;76:295-297.

Asero R, Tedeschi A. Usefulness of a short
ne in antihistamine
 

resistant chronic urticaria: a retrospective
analysis. J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol
2010;20:386-390.

Magerl M, Philipp S, Manasterski M,
Friedrich M, Maurer M. Successful treatment of delayed pressure urticaria with
anti-TNF-alpha. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2007;119:752-754.

Allergy 69 (2014) 868-887 © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd

EAACI/GA?LEN/EDF/WAO urticaria guideline

135.

136.

137.

138.

139.

140.

141.

142.

143.

144,

145,

146.

147,

O'Donnell BF, Barr RM, Black AK, Francis DM, Kermani F, Niimi N et al. Intravenous immunoglobulin in autoimmune
chronic urticaria. Br J Dermatol

1998;138: 101-106.

Dawn G, Urcelay M, Ah-Weng A, O’Neill SM, Douglas WS. Effect of high-dose
intravenous immunoglobulin in delayed

 

pressure urticaria. Br J Dermatol 2003;
149:836-840.

Pereira C, Tavares B, Carrapatoso 1,

ia E, Machado D et al.

Low-dose intravenous gammaglobulin in
the treatment of severe autoimmune urti
 

Loureiro G,

caria. Eur Ann Allergy Clin Immunol
2007;39:237-242.

Mitzel-Kaoukhoy H, Staubach P, MullerBrenne T. Effect of high-dose intravenous
immunoglobulin treatment in therapyresistant chronic spontaneous urticaria.
Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2010;104:
253-258.

Brazzelli V, Grasso V, Manna G, Barbaccia
V, Merante S, Boveri E et al. Indolent
systemic mastocytosis treated with
narrow-band UVB phototherapy: study of
five cases. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
2012;26:465-469.

Hannuksela M, Kokkonen EL. Ultraviolet
light therapy in chronic urticaria. Acta
Derm Venereol 1985;65:449-450.

Borzova E, Rutherford A, Konstantinou
GN, Leslie KS, Grattan CE. Narrowband
ultraviolet B phototherapy is beneficial in
antihistamine-resistant symptomatic dermographism: a pilot study. J Am Acad Dermatol 2008;59:752—757.

Engin B, Ozdemir M, Balevi A, Mevlitoglu
I. Treatment of chronic urticaria with narrowband ultraviolet B phototherapy: a randomized controlled trial. Acta Derm
Venereol 2008;88:247-251.

Thormann J, Laurberg G, Zachariae H.
Oral sodium cromoglycate in chronic urticaria. Allergy 1980;35:139-141.

Laurberg G. Tranexamic acid (Cyklokapron) in chronic urticaria: a double-blind
study. Acta Derm Venereol 1977;57:369370.

Lawlor F, Ormerod AD, Greaves MW.
Calcium antagonist in the treatment of
symptomatic dermographism. Low-dose
and high-dose studies with nifedipine.
Dermatologica 1988;177:287-291.

lack AK, Ward AM, Morris
R, Greaves MW. Delayed pressure urticaria, objective evaluation of a variable dis
Lawlor F, B

ease using a dermographometer and
assessment of treatment using colchicine.
Br J Dermatol 1989;120:403—408.

Dover JS, Black AK, Ward AM, Greaves
MW. Delayed pres:
features, laboratory investigations, and

re urticaria. Clinical

  

885
EAACI/GA?LEN/EDF/WAO urticaria guideline

response to therapy of 44 patients. J Am
Acad Dermatol 1988;18:1289-1298.

148. Weber-Schoendorfer C, Schaefer C.
The safety of cetirizine during pregnancy.
A prospective observational cohort
study. Reprod Toxicol 2008;26:

149. Schwarz EB, Moretti ME, Nayak S, Koren
G. Risk of hypospadias in offspring of
women using loratadine during pregnancy:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Drug
Saf 2008;31:775-788.

150. Zuberbier T, Aberer W, Asero R, Bindslev- e29.

Zuberbier et al.

Methods report on the development of the
2013 revision and update of the EAACI/
GA?LEN/EDF/WAO Guideline for the
definition, classification, diagnosis, and
management of urticaria. 2014;69:¢1—

 

19-23. Jensen C, Brzoza Z, Canonica GW et al.

Appendix 1
Societies involved in the Urticaria Guideline

AAAAT, American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology (see Acknowledgments); AEDV, Spanish Academy of
Dermatology and Venereology; ASBAI, Brazilian Association
of Allergy and Immunopathology; CDA, Chinese Dermatologist Association; CSACI, Canadian Society of Allergy and
Clinical Immunology; DDG, German Society of Dermatology; DGAKI, German Society of Allergology and Clinical
Immunology; EAACI, European Academy of Allergy and
Clinical Immunology; EDF, European Dermatology Forum;
ESCD, European Society of Contact Dermatitis; GA°LEN,
Global Allergy and Asthma European Network; IAACI,
Israel Association of Allergy and Clinical Immunology;
IADVL, Indian Association of Dermatologists, Venereologists and Leprologists; JDA, Japanese Dermatological Association; OGDV, Austrian Society for Dermatology; SDF,
French Society of Dermatology; SGDV, Swiss Society for
Dermatology and Venereology; SPDV, Portuguese Society of
Dermatology and Venereology; MSAI, Malaysian Society of
Allergy and Immunology; UNEV, Urticaria Network; WAO,
World Allergy Organization.

Appendix 2

Methods report on the development of the 2013
revision and update of the EAACI/GA7LEN/EDF/WAO
Guideline for the definition, classification, diagnosis,
and management of urticaria

The methods report on the development of the updated international guideline on urticaria provides in-depth information
on the development process of the 2013 revision of this international guideline. The update and revision of the guidelines
was based on three previous versions of the guideline, which
resulted from urticaria guideline consensus conferences in
2000, 2004 and 2008 (1-6). The guideline itself was developed
in alignment with the quality criteria contained within the
Appraisal of Guidelines Research & Evaluation (AGREE)
Instrument, the Grading of Recommendations Assessment,
Development and Evaluation (GRADE) Working Group,
and the German Association of Scientific Medical Societies
(AWME).

The societies nominated a balanced number of experts representing the different societies, geographical regions and specialties in medicine involved in the treatment of urticaria, i.e.
dermatologists, allergologists, pediatricians, pharmacologists
and representatives of patients’ organizations. The process
was supervised by A. Nast, a methodologist in guideline

preparation with background knowledge as a dermatologist.

Prior to the consensus meeting a list of questions was devel
oped by the expert panel’s steering committee for review and

rating. The key questions were prepared with answers
according to the available evidence by the expert panel.

The formalized literature research performed entailed:

1 The previous versions of the guideline (1-6). For the previous versions of the guideline a systematic search as
described in the respective publications had been conducted and all randomized trials published up to and in
2008 had been evaluated and documented in GRADE
tables.

2 A new literature search for all publications as of 2008.
This literature research was based on the systematic
research in Medline, Embase, Cochrane Library and Medline in Process. After checking for duplicates, all abstracts
were screened by two independent researchers, 188 full
texts were obtained and 67 were included in the body of
evidence. The included literature was selected with respect
to their hierarchy in the ‘evidence pyramid’, e.g. if a good
systematic review was available and up to date no further
systematic analysis of randomized controlled trials (RCTs)
or cohort studies was done. This was chosen in case of
existing high-quality RCTs, no further systematic analysis
of cases series or case reports was done.

In the previous version of the guideline, studies were evaluated using the GRADE approach. The key principle of this
approach is to provide transparency as well as clear and
explicit criteria for assessing the quality of evidence and for
grading the strength of recommendations (9) based on risks
vs benefits. The strength of a recommendation and the quality of supporting evidence were assessed independently for
each recommendation, taking into consideration negative and
positive effects such as unwanted effects, reduction of urticaria symptoms, practicability, feasibility and costs. Importantly, the GRADE system permits strong recommendations
supported by low- or, very rarely, very low-quality evidence
from downgraded RCTs or observational studies. On the
other hand, weak recommendations may be based on highquality evidence if other factors are important, e.g. the price
of a treatment option.

The phrase ‘we recommend’ was used for strong recommendations and ‘we suggest’ for weak recommendations in
order to adhere to the same methodology used for the Allergic Rhinitis and its Impact on Asthma guideline 2008 update
(10).

The consensus meeting was held in Berlin from 28 to 29
November 2012. Based on the prepared questions and the
previous version of the guideline, a draft manuscript was

886 Allergy 69 (2014) 868-887 © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Zuberbier et al.

prepared for the consensus meeting which included the presence of more than 200 specialists from 39 countries from all
over the world. All participants were equipped with printouts
of the documents prepared. To ensure that the guideline recommendations are both evidence-based and practical, all of
them were discussed and accepted by voting during the consensus meeting.

If a recommendation did not achieve 90% agreement in
the first voting, the respective recommendation was then rediscussed and, if needed, rephrased. In order to pass the second voting round, a minimum of 75% agreement had to be
achieved. After finishing the document the newly phrased
guidelines were sent out for an extensive external review by
all societies involved. This step was made specifically to
ensure that possible national legislation would not contradict
the guideline contents.

One of the societies originally involved in the preparation
at this stage made the decision not to endorse the guideline

EAACI/GA?LEN/EDF/WAO urticaria guideline

as it felt that there were too many discrepancies with already
existing recommendations in their own country.

The methods report in extensive detail, displaying all of
the different phrasings discussed during the meeting, will be
available online (150). The validity of the guideline is four
years (2017). Since new interventions may be licensed or relevant changes in information (for example, on adverse events)
may become available before this point, the steering committee will evaluate the need for an earlier update of the whole
guideline or individual questions at regular intervals.

In conclusion, the process of revision of the urticaria
guideline is a good example allowing an advanced methodology for evidence-based medicine but also including a variety
of opinions, not only of experts in the field who are mainly
based in academic institutions, but also of specialists who are
involved in daily routine practice in this field of treatment.

Allergy 69 (2014) 868-887 © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 887
