Research

Original Investigation

Retreatment With Omalizumab Results in Rapid Remission
in Chronic Spontaneous and Inducible Urticaria

Martin Metz, MD; Tatevik Ohanyan, MD; Martin K. Church, PhD, DSc; Marcus Maurer, MD

IMPORTANCE Omalizumab has emerged as a novel and effective treatment option for
patients with antihistamine-resistant chronic urticaria. It is unclear whether patients with
recurrent urticaria symptoms after discontinuation of omalizumab treatment can benefit
from retreatment.

OBJECTIVE To assess the response of patients with chronic urticaria who receive omalizumab
retreatment.

DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS Retrospective analyses were conducted of outpatients
treated at an urticaria specialist center of a university hospital. Participants included 25
consecutive patients (aged 18-74 years; 18 women) with chronic spontaneous urticaria,
chronic inducible urticaria, or both who showed complete response to omalizumab
treatment, experienced relapse after discontinuation of treatment, and received retreatment
with omalizumab.

INTERVENTIONS Subcutaneous treatment with omalizumab (150-600 mg/mo).

MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES Response after retreatment was assessed by the urticaria
activity score in patients with chronic spontaneous urticaria and by trigger threshold testing
(in patients with cold urticaria or symptomatic dermographism) and/or a carefully determined
history (in patients with cholinergic urticaria, solar urticaria, or pressure urticaria). Adverse
events were documented.
Author Affiliations: Department

288

RESULTS All patients experienced complete response after retreatment. None of the patients
reported relevant adverse events during omalizumab treatment and retreatment.

CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE Omalizumab retreatment is effective and safe in patients with
chronic urticaria who have benefited from initial omalizumab treatment.

of Dermatology, Venerology, and
Allergology, Allergie-Centrum-Charité,
Charité-Universitatsmedizin Berlin,
Berlin, Germany.

Corresponding Author: Marcus
Maurer, MD, Department

JAMA Dermatol. 2014;150(3):288-290. doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2013.8705

Published online January 29, 2014.

reatment of chronic urticaria is difficult because many
patients are refractory to conventional therapy. Recently, omalizumab, an anti-IgE antibody approved for
the treatment of moderate to severe asthma, has emerged as
an effective, guideline-recommended treatment option for patients with antihistamine-resistant chronic urticaria.*> As of
now, more than 1000 patients with chronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU) have reportedly’*-°? been treated with omalizumab, many in clinical trials. Most study patients who

of Dermatology, Venerology,

and Allergology,
Charité-Universitatsmedizin Berlin,
Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany
(marcus.maurer@charite.de).

duration. Because of this, most patients who have benefited
from omalizumab, within or outside of clinical trials, and have
experienced relapse of symptoms after cessation of treatment are considered for retreatment with omalizumab. To our
knowledge, there have been no reports on the effects, response rates, and adverse events in patients with chronic urticaria retreated with omalizumab.

 

eT
achieved benefit from this treatment experienced relapse of Methods
symptoms after completion of the clinical trial in which they

were enrolled (ie, after cessation of omalizumab treatment).° —_ Patients

In patients with urticaria treated with omalizumab outside of
clinical trials, the drug is used off-label. Off-label omalizumab treatment is frequently limited toa trial of a few months’

JAMA Dermatology March2014 Volume 150, Number 3

We retrospectively assessed disease activity and adverse
events in 25 patients with CSU and/or chronic inducible urticaria (aged 18-74 years; 18 women) who received omalizumab

jamadermatology.com

Copyright 2014 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by guest on 01/29/2019
Omalizumab for Rapid Remission of Urticaria

retreatment after a successful trial of this drug (ie, >90%
improvement of symptoms without the need for concurrent
use of antihistamines) after first treatment with omalizumab
and relapse of the symptoms. The patients received treatment at the urticaria specialist clinic of the Department of
Dermatology, Venerology, and Allergology, Charité-Universitatsmedizin Berlin. In all patients receiving omalizumab,
successful applications for funding by health insurers were
necessary so that the patients did not have to meet the costs
of treatment. Because these analyses were conducted on data
recorded during the routine care of patients, approval by our
ethics committee was not required and no formal inclusion
or exclusion criteria were applied; the only exclusion criterion was that patients who were participating in clinical trials
were not included.

Treatment

All patients received initial treatment for at least 3 months
with omalizumab doses ranging from 150 to 600 mg/mo
given subcutaneously in 2- to 4-week intervals. In some
patients, the doses were increased to achieve complete
symptom control; in others, doses were decreased or the
interval between doses was prolonged.’ Disease activity in
patients with CSU was determined before and after initial
treatment with omalizumab by use of the Urticaria Activity
Score 7,'? and a reduction of 90% or more was considered to
indicate complete response. Urticaria activity scores were
calculated based on patients’ daily documentation of symptoms in diaries. Disease activity in patients with inducible
urticaria was determined by trigger threshold testing (in
patients with cold urticaria or symptomatic dermographism)
and/or by the patient’s history (in patients with cholinergic
urticaria, solar urticaria, or pressure urticaria). A reduction
of the trigger strength by 90% or more was considered complete response. Retreatment was initiated after the recurrence of symptoms without prior monitoring of disease
activity. All patients received the same dose of omalizumab
in the same interval as the last successful treatment before
discontinuation of treatment. Adverse events were documented during follow-up visits (every 2-4 weeks).

a
Results

 

Overall, 25 patients, with a mean age of 45 years (range, 18-74
years; 18 women [72%] and 7 men [28%]) with chronic urticaria (9 [36%] CSU, 5 [20%] CSU and delayed pressure urticaria, 3 [12%] cholinergic urticaria, 3 [12%] symptomatic dermographism, 1 [4%] delayed pressure urticaria, 1 [4%] solar
urticaria, 1 [4%] cold urticaria, 1 [4%] CSU and symptomatic
dermographism, and 1[4%] cold urticaria and cholinergic urticaria) were included in this retrospective analysis. All patients had complete symptom control (defined as 290% improvement) without the requirement of any other drugs used
for treatment of urticaria after their first use of omalizumab.
All of the patients experienced a relapse of disease resulting
in urticaria symptoms despite antihistamine treatment within
2 to 8 weeks after their last omalizumab injection, except for

jamadermatology.com

Original Investigation Research

Figure. Time to Urticaria Relapse After Omalizumab Treatment

 

12

 

 

Chronic spontaneous urticaria
10 [Hi Cold urticaria

[i Cholinergic urticaria

[Hi Solar urticaria

Symptomatic dermographism

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Delayed pressure urticaria

2
io i iN
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 il 4 7,
Weeks

Time Before Reappearance of Symptoms

 

 

No. of Patients
a

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Months

 

Each patient is represented by a square, with colors indicating the type of
urticaria disease. Two colors within a single square indicate comorbidity of
2 urticaria diseases.

 

2 patients (8%) who experienced relapse after 4 and 7 months.
On reinitiation of omalizumab treatment, all patients reported a rapid and complete response after the first injection
within the first 4 weeks, usually during the first days, of retreatment (Figure). All patients were able to stop antihistamine treatment, and none reported relevant adverse events
(ie, adverse effects other than mild and transient injection site
reactions) during the initial use or during the second round of
treatment.

—————
Discussion

 

To our knowledge, this is the first report that retreatment with
omalizumab can be effective and safe in patients with chronic
urticaria who had previously benefited from this treatment.
Notably, all patients showed the same response rate (100%) and
relevant adverse event rate (0%) on retreatment as they did
during their first trial of omalizumab.

This was a retrospective analysis of data from the medical records of 25 individuals. It has strength in that it reflects
animportant clinical situation faced in urticaria therapy. It also,
by its nature, has weaknesses, which include the small number of patients and the lack of information about the comparative times of onset of the first and second responses.

The patients included in these analyses had to fulfill 2 selection criteria. First, they had to show complete response
(290% improvement of symptoms) to their first treatment of
omalizumab. Second, they had to demonstrate relapse after
discontinuation of omalizumab treatment. Both benefit from
omalizumab and relapse after its discontinuation is the rule,
and not the exception, in patients with chronic urticaria that
we treat. Less than 30% of all our patients with urticaria who
receive omalizumab outside of clinical trials show no response or only partial response to omalizumab treatment,’ and
less than 10% of the patients who respond remain free of symptoms after discontinuation of omalizumab therapy. Thus, the
question whether chronic urticaria should be retreated with

JAMA Dermatology March2014 Volume 150, Number 3

Copyright 2014 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by guest on 01/29/2019

289
290

Research Original investigation

omalizumab arises frequently and, most often, in patients who
have previously received this drug.

Omalizumab doses required to achieve complete response varied widely among patients (from 150 to 600 mg/
mo). In individual patients, however, the doses that resulted
incomplete protection after retreatment were the same as those
that did so during initial treatment, indicating that patients exhibit distinct and persistent levels of response. Similarly, the
dosing schedule varied among patients. However, in most of
our patients who receive omalizumab, a 4-week interval between injections has been optimal.”

We did not check the patients who received omalizumab
for the development of neutralizing antibodies, and our
results do not support a need to do so. Previous analyses" of

Omalizumab for Rapid Remission of Urticaria

patients with asthma or allergic rhinitis demonstrated that
omalizumab treatment does not lead to measurable antiomalizumab antibodies in these patients, and our data do
not suggest that patients with urticaria are any different.

po
Conclusions

 

Although the number of patients observed here is too low to
draw definite conclusions, our findings strongly suggest
that retreatment with omalizumab is a safe and effective
option for treatment of chronic urticaria in patients who
previously benefited from this drug and show relapse of
symptoms.

ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: September 14, 2013.

Published Online: January 29, 2014.
doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2013.8705.

Author Contributions: Drs Metz and Maurer had
full access to all the data in the study and take
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis.

Study concept and design: Metz, Maurer.
Acquisition of data: Ohanyan, Maurer.

Analysis and interpretation of data: All authors.
Drafting of the manuscript: Metz, Church, Maurer.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: All authors.

Statistical analysis: Church.

Administrative, technical, or material support:
Ohanyan, Maurer.

Study supervision: Metz, Maurer.

Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Metz received
honoraria from Bayer, Novartis, UCB, and Dr R.
Pfleger. Dr Church has been a speaker or consultant
for Almirall, FAES Menarini, MSD, Pharma, UCB
Pharma, sanofi-aventis, and Uriach. Dr Maurer is a
speaker and/or advisor for Almirall, Bayer,
Biofrontera, FAES, Genentech, GSK, Merckle
Recordati, MSD, Moxie, Novartis, sanofi-aventis, UCB,
and Uriach. No other disclosures were reported.

Additional Contributions: Hesna Gézliikaya
provided excellent technical and medical
assistance. Gézltikaya received no financial
compensation for these services.

REFERENCES

1. Kaplan A, Ledford D, Ashby M, et al. Omalizumab
in patients with symptomatic chronic

idiopathic/spontaneous urticaria despite standard
combination therapy. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2013;132(1):101-109.

2. Maurer M, Altrichter S, Bieber T, et al. Efficacy
and safety of omalizumab in patients with chronic
urticaria who exhibit IgE against thyroperoxidase.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011;128(1):202-209.e5.
doi:10.1016/j.jaci.2011.04.038.

3. Maurer M, Rosén K, Hsieh HJ, et al. Omalizumab
for the treatment of chronic idiopathic or
spontaneous urticaria. N Engl J Med.
2013;368(10):924-935.

4, Saini S, Rosen KE, Hsieh HJ, et al. Arandomized,
placebo-controlled, dose-ranging study of single-dose
omalizumab in patients with H1-antihistaminerefractory chronic idiopathic urticaria. J Allergy Clin
Immunol. 2011;128(3):567-573.e1. doi:10.1016
/j,jaci.2011.06.010.

5. Zuberbier T, Asero R, Bindslev-Jensen C, et al;
Dermatology Section of the European Academy of
Allergology and Clinical Immunology; Global Allergy
and Asthma European Network; European
Dermatology Forum; World Allergy Organization.
EAACI/GA(2)LEN/EDF/WAO guideline: management
of urticaria. Allergy. 2009;64(10):1427-1443.

6. Metz M, Maurer M. Omalizumab in chronic
urticaria. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol.
2012;12(4):406-411.

7. Metz M, Ohanyan T, Church MK, Maurer M.
Omalizumab is an effective and rapidly acting
therapy in difficult-to-treat chronic urticaria:

a retrospective clinical analysis [published online
September 23, 2013]. J Dermatol Sci.
doi:10.1016/j.jdermsci.2013.08.011.

JAMA Dermatology March2014 Volume 150, Number 3

8. Viswanathan RK, Moss MH, Mathur SK.
Retrospective analysis of the efficacy of omalizumab
in chronic refractory urticaria. Allergy Asthma Proc.
2013;34(5):446-452.

9. Labrador-Horrillo M, Valero A, Velasco M, et al.
Efficacy of omalizumab in chronic spontaneous
urticaria refractory to conventional therapy:
analysis of 110 patients in real-life practice. Expert
Opin Biol Ther. 2013;13(9):1225-1228.

10. Armengot-Carbo M, Velasco-Pastor M,
Rodrigo-Nicolas B, Pont-Sanjuan V,
Quecedo-Estebanez E, Gimeno-Carpio E.
Omalizumab in chronic urticaria: a retrospective
series of 15 cases. Dermatol Ther. 2013;26(3):
257-259.

11. Song CH, Stern S, Giruparajah M, Berlin N,
Sussman GL. Long-term efficacy of fixed-dose
omalizumab for patients with severe chronic
spontaneous urticaria. Ann Allergy Asthma
Immunol. 2013;110(2):113-117.

12. Nam YH, Kim JH, Jin HJ, et al. Effects of
omalizumab treatment in patients with refractory
chronic urticaria. Allergy Asthma Immunol Res.
2012;4(6):357-361.

13. Mtynek A, Zalewska-Janowska A, Martus P,
Staubach P, Zuberbier T, Maurer M. How to assess
disease activity in patients with chronic urticaria?
Allergy. 2008;63(6):777-780.

14. Corren J, Casale TB, Lanier B, Buhl R, Holgate S,
Jimenez P. Safety and tolerability of omalizumab.
Clin Exp Allergy. 2009;39(6):788-797.

jamadermatology.com

Copyright 2014 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by guest on 01/29/2019
