ORIGINAL ARTICLES

Eur ANN ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL VoL 48, N 5, 182-187, 2016

 

E. Nettis!, E. Di Leo’, A. Pasrore!, M. Distaso!, I. Zaza', M. Vacca!, L. Maccuia!, A. Vacca!

Probiotics and refractory chronic spontaneous urticaria

‘Department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of Bari Policlinico, Piazza Giulio Cesare 11, 70124 Bari, Italy
?Section of Allergology and Clinical Immunology, Unit of Internal Medicine, “F. Miulli” Hospital, Acquaviva delle Fonti, Bari, Italy

Key worps

H1-antihistamine therapy; Chronic
Spontaneous urticaria; Lactobacillus
salivarius; Bifidobacterium breve

Corresponding author

Eustachio Nettis

Cattedra di Allergologia ed Immunologia
Clinica

Universita degli Studi di Bari

Policlinico, Piazza Giulio Cesare, 11
70124 Bari, Italy

Phone: +39 080 5592 821

Fax: +39 080 5593 576

E-mail: ambulatorio.allergologia@uniba.it

Introduction

Summary

Background. In chronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU) first-line therapy with an antihistamine-based regimen may not achieve satisfactory control in patients. Thus, a continuing need
exists for effective and safe treatments for refractory CSU. Aim. To evaluate the clinical efficacy
and safety of an intake of a combination of 2 probiotics (Lactobacillus salivarius LSO1 and Bifidobacterium breve BRO3) in patients with CSU who remain symptomatic despite concomitant H1-antihistamine therapy. Methods. This report analyzes the effects of therapy with two
probiotic strains on the clinical progress of 52 unselected patients with difficulty to treat CSU
underwent to medical examination in two Italian specialist urticaria Clinics between September 2013 and September 2014. A mixture of Lactobacillus LSO1 and Bifidobacterium BRO3
were administered in each patient twice daily for 8 weeks. To evaluate patients’ improvement
with probiotics, urticaria activity score over 7 days (UAS7) was used at baseline and at week 8
in addition to a 5-question urticaria quality of life questionnaire. Results. Fifty-two patients
with CSU were included in this study (10 male and 42 female, age range 19-72 years). Mean
disease duration was 1.5 years. Fourteen patients discontinued treatment, so evaluable population consisted of 38 patients. Nine of the 38 patients experienced mild clinical improvement
during probiotic treatment (23.7%); one patient reported significant clinical improvement
(2.6%) and one patient had complete remission of urticaria (2.6%). Twenty-seven patients did
not have improvement in symptoms (71.1%). No side effects during the course of therapy were
reported. Conclusions. A combination of Lactobacillus salivarius LSO1 and Bifidobacterium breve BRO3 administered twice daily for 8 weeks might reduce the symptoms scores and
improve quality of life scores in a part of patients with CSU who remained symptomatic despite
treatment with H1 antihistamine mostly in subjects with allergic rhinitis.

months, but a substantial number of patients may have symptoms lasting periodically for years, or suffer irritating symptoms

Chronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU) is classically defined as
the occurrence of spontaneous wheals on most days for more
than six weeks. It is a common skin condition that affects 0.13% of people in the USA and Europe (1).

The course and duration of CSU are highly variable and unpredictable. Spontaneous remission may often occur within 12

such as pruritus for decades (2). CSU is frequently a disabling
disease due to the persistency of clinical symptoms, the unpredictable course and negative influence on the quality of life, as it
can cause sleep disruption, fatigue, social isolation, energy loss

and emotional / sexual disturbances (3). The goal of treatment
Probiotics and refractory chronic spontaneous urticaria

183

 

in CSU is to ensure rapid and prolonged control of the symptoms and a rapid return to normal social activities.
Symptomatic treatment for CSU is the most frequently used
form of management, and a step-wise approach is recommended (4). Modern second-generation H1-receptor antagonists are
the primary treatment at licensed doses (5,6), and updosing
is second-line treatment. First-line therapy with an antihistamine-based regimen may not achieve satisfactory control in 5%
to as many as 50% of patients with CSU (7). Those with refractory CSU require treatment with H1-antihistamines increasing
doses by up to 4 times; if symptoms persist, a trial of omalizumab, cyclosporine or montelukast (4,8) as add on therapy is
recommended; frequent exacerbations may be treated with systemic steroid. However, the toxicities and adverse events associated with cyclosporine and long-term steroid exposure should
be considered carefully (9). Thus, a continuing need exists for
effective and safe treatments for refractory CSU; trials of several
novel therapeutics are in progress.

Tt was seen that Lactobacillus salivarius LSQ1 and the combination of 2 probiotics (Lactobacillus salivarius LSO1 and Bifidobacterium breve BRO3) have the capability to reduce the release of
pro-Th-2 cytokines from THP-1 cells, favouring an improvement in T-helper cell (Th)1/Th2 (10,11).

Th2 cells play a critical role in the pathogenesis of allergic reactions and in the production of IgE antibodies.

In CSU, IgE antibodies, Fc RI, and mast cells are likely to play
essential pathologic roles, although the causative factors have
not been identified (12). The aim of this study was to evaluate
the clinical efficacy and safety of an intake of a combination of
2 probiotics (Lactobacillus salivarius LSO1 and. Bifidobacterium
breve BRO3) in patients with CSU who remain symptomatic
despite concomitant H1-antihistamine therapy.

Materials and Methods

This report is an analysis of the effects of therapy with two probiotic strains on the clinical progress of 52 unselected patients
with difficult to treat CSU, who previously underwent medical
examination in two Italian specialist urticaria Clinics (Unit of
Study on Urticaria / Angioedema, Policlinico, Bari, and Allergology Unit, Miulli Hospital, Acquaviva delle Fonti) between
September 2013 and September 2014. To be started on probiotic therapy, patients had to have shown to be unresponsive after
almost one month of H1-anthistamines treatment.

 

In all enrolled patients, a diagnosis of CSU was made by a
careful history and detailed physical examination, submitting
them to clinical, laboratory and instrumental investigations according to individual clinical history and findings in each patient. Tests included: urinalysis, routine laboratory evaluation
(including complement C3, C4 and Cl inhibitor antigenic
level, thyroid function test, antithyroid autoantibodies, antinu
clear antibodies, rheumatoid factor, serum immunoglobulins,
circulating immune complexes, cryoglobulins, stool screening
for blood, parasites and yeast, serology for viral, bacterial and
parasite antibodies, serum electrophoresis, gastroscopy, biopsy
and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for specific anti-Helicobacter pylori IgG antibodies), X-ray studies (including dental
series, sinus series and chest X-ray) and sonography of the upper
abdomen. Skin prick tests were performed with common available foods and inhalants (Stallergenes, Milan, Italy). In some
cases, a “prick-prick test” with fresh raw food was made. Measurement of total IgE level was made (UniCAP, Thermofisher,
Milan, Italy) and specific serum IgE according to patients’ anamnesis (UniCAP, Thermofisher, Milan, Italy).

Drug-related etiology was established on the basis of the criteria

 

 

laid down by the protocols in literature (13). Briefly, the methods used to evaluate patients with suspected drug-induced urticaria were a detailed history, withdrawal of the suspected drug,

and in some cases in vivo and in vitro testing. In order to eval
 

uate the role of foods and additives, single blind placebo-con
 

trolled in vivo provocation tests with foods and additives were
performed when necessary. Autologous serum skin tests, were
performed as previously reported (14). So, in these patients inducible urticarial alone, urticaria caused by medications, insect
bites, food or other known causes were excluded. In addition,
patients with significant concomitant illness (e.g. malignancies
or psychiatric, hepatic, endocrine or other major systemic diseases) were also excluded.

After the CSU diagnosis, all patients had received second generation H1-antihistamines at up to twofold higher than the licensed dose in an attempt to control their condition. Some patients had even received three or more different antihistamines.
Eighteen and nine patients had previously required corticosteroids and montelukast, respectively, to control symptoms.
Patients were administered twice daily for 8 weeks a marketed
oral probiotic (Bifiderm®, Bayer S.p.A, which is a mixture of
Lactobacillus salivarius LSO1 and Bifidobacterium breve BRO3 at
a dose = 1x109 colony-forming units (CFU)/g each in maltodextrin).

Throughout the treatment period, participants were required
to maintain stable doses of the previous therapy with H1-antihistamines.

Each patient was examined by the physician 3 times over the
8-week period: this included (apart from the initial screening
visits), a Ist visit at the start of treatment with the probiotic
state; a 2nd visit after 4 weeks of treatment; and a final visit after
8 weeks (end of treatment).

Throughout the study and one week before starting the probiotic state, all patients recorded their symptoms in a daily diary
(pruritus and number of wheals). At each clinical visit the patient’s diary was reviewed, the patient was interviewed as to the
184 E. Nettis, E. Di Leo, A. Pastore, M. Distaso, I. Zaza, M. Vacca, L. Macchia, A. Vacca

 

event/s occurring in the previous week/s, and a physical examination was performed.

Baseline severity was determined by urticaria activity score over
7 days (UAS7) 1 week before probiotic treatment. UAS7 is a
simple patient-reported scoring system that captures the severity
of pruritus and number of hives during 1 week (15). Intensity
of pruritus (range, 0 [none] to 3 [severe]) and the number of
hives ratings (range, 0 [none] to 3 [> 12 hives]) were recorded
daily (maximum, 6 points per day). Scores were then summed
for 1 week to represent the UAS7 (scale, 0-42). All patients had
a UAS7 of 6 or greater despite antihistamine therapy. The primary end point was the change from baseline to week 8 in the
UAS7. The responses to the probiotic state were described as
follows: “complete response” was defined as a reduction of 90%
or more in the UAS7, “significant improvement” as a reduction
in the UAS7 of 90%-30%, “mild improvement” as a reduction
in the UAS7 of 30%-10% and “no significant improvement” as
less than 10% reduction in the UAS7.

A 5-question urticaria quality of life questionnaire was administered at each clinical visit, evaluating the following domains: cutaneous symptoms, emotions, practical problems. The questions
were: “Over the last week, how itchy, sore, painful or stinging
has your skin been? Over the last week, how embarrassed or
self-conscious have you been because of your skin? Over the last
week, how much has your skin influenced the clothes you wear?
Over the last week, how much has your skin affected any social
or leisure activities? Over the last week, has your skin prevented you from working or studying? If “No”, over the last week
how much has your skin been a problem at work or studying?”.
These are part of the Dermatology QualityLife Index (16).
Patients scored their response to each question on a 4-point
scale ranging from 0 (no problems) to 3 (severe problems).
Safety and tolerability were assessed on the basis of the adverse
events referred or changes in vital signs, and physical examination findings.

Approval from the Ethics Committee of the hospital was not
necessary, because the analyses were performed on data recorded
during the routine treatment of patients. Patients provided oral
informed consent to have their data included for analysis.

Results

Fifty-two patients with CSU were included in this study (10 male
and 42 female, age range 19-72 years). Mean disease duration was
1.5 years (range 0.3-9.4 years). Twenty-four of these subjects had
a history of angioedema. Twelve of the 52 patients had to have a
documented history of seasonal or perennial allergic rhinitis related to positive skin prick test and/or laboratory tests.

Fourteen patients discontinued treatment. The reasons for discontinuation were: non-compliance (n = 3); and lack of desire
to continue because of no improvement in symptoms (n = 11).

The evaluable population thus consisted of 38 patients. A total of 18 patients (44%) were classified as having a suspected
chronic autoreactive urticaria demonstrated by a positive autologous serum skin test.
Nine of the 38 patients experienced mild clinical improvement
during probiotic treatment (23.7%). One of the 38 patients
experienced significant clinical improvement (2.6%). One patient had complete remission of urticaria (2.6%). This female
patient had a UAS7 of 8 despite antihistamine therapy, and the
duration of urticaria was 6 months. Then, a total of 11 subjects
(28.9%) showed improvement on Probiotic therapy (table 1).
In this group, at week 8, mean 5-question urticaria quality of
life questionnaire score decreased from baseline (1 week before
probiotic treatment) by 2.46 points. Twenty-seven patients did
not have improvement in symptoms (71.1%) and eleven of

 

them required short courses of prednisone for symptom relief.
We compared the characteristics of 11 patients with improvement in symptoms with those of 27 patients without improvement in symptoms.

In subjects with improvement in symptoms emerged only a
high prevalence of allergic rhinitis (8 of 11) than in the group of
patients without improvement of symptoms (2 of 27).

No patient reported any side effects during the course of therapy in all study groups.

Discussion

CSU, one of the most frequent skin allergy diseases, is a heterogeneous condition, and prognostic factors for each treatment
are not well known. CSU is a disease that is particularly difficult to treat. Although non-sedating antihistamines are recommended as first-line agents, a substantial proportion of patients
remain poorly responsive to these agents even if H2-receptor
antagonists and/or leukotriene pathway inhibitors are added
(17). Such patients are often treated with corticosteroids or cyclosporine or omalizumab (4), and alternatives to these agents
would be a welcome addition if efficacy could be shown with an
acceptable tolerability profile. Thus, a continuing need exists for
effective and safe treatments for refractory CSU.

In this study we evaluated the clinical efficacy and safety of an
intake of a combination of 2 probiotics (Lactobacillus salivarius
LSO1 and Bifidobacterium breve BRO3) in patients with CSU
who were refractory to conventional treatment.

In a group of 11 subjects, after Probiotics intake, a reduction
of disease activity and improvement of patients’ health-related
quality of life were observed. From a questionnaire administered
to urticarial patients, O'Donnell et al. (3) established that the
disability described by patients is comparable to that of patients
with ischemic heart disease. Successively, Finlay et al. (16) developed the Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI). They use
it to measure and compare the disability induced by a variety o

 

 
Probiotics and refractory chronic spontaneous urticaria

185

 

common dermatological conditions and suggest that the questionnaire can be administered before and after treatment interventions, to serve as an indicator of treatment efficacy.

Because of the relatively small patient population in our study,
it was difficult to determine any patient characteristics that were
predictors of response to Probiotic supplement. The presence of
thyroid autoantibodies, angioedema, positive ASST, and age did
not appear to predict response. The presence of allergic rhinitis
in CSU patients seemed to be a possible predictor of response
to Probiotics.

The role of probiotics in regulating intestinal health has been
widely studied for over a century. Modulation of the intestinal microbiota is one of the important functions of probiotics,
which is deeply associated with the modulation of the intestinal
immune system, improving bowel movement and decreasing allergy (18,19). However, in recent years, several lines of evidence
suggest that some bacterial probiotics can modulate the skin
immune system (20). In human clinical trials, probiotic supplementation showed potential in the relief of atopic dermatitis
and dry skin (21).

There is evidence suggesting that alteration of the composition
and/or size of the gut microflora may modulate the IgE response
to allergens (22). Because modern lifestyles have contributed to
changes in the composition of the intestinal microflora, diet
supplementation with probiotics may counterbalance the Th-2

activity by promoting Th-1 cytokines production and downregulate IgE production via inhibition of IL-4 and IL-5 production
(23). Additionally, it was showed that L. paracasei NC 2461
induced development of a population of CD4+ T cells that produced TGF-B and IL-10 (24), which could downregulate IgE
roduction (25).

t was seen that Lactobacillus salivarius LSO1 and the combination of 2 probiotics (Lactobacillus salivarius LSO1 and. Bifidobacterium breve BRO3) reduced the release of type 2 cytokines
interleukin (IL)-4 and IL-13] and induced an improvement in
the T-helper cell (Th)1/Th2 ratio. This probiotic formulation
upregulates Th1 functions and down regulates Th2 and Th17
activity, improving Th1/Th2 and Th17/Treg ratios (10,11).
Recent evidence suggests that helper T cells (Th2) play a triggering role in the activation / recruitment of IgE antibody producing B cells, mast cells and eosinophils (26).

n cases of CSU, in which autoreactive IgG antibodies against
FceRI, IgE, or both
toallergens are found, these autoantibodies are causative factors,
and IgE, FceRI, and mast cells are unambiguously at the centre
of the pathologic process. For the remaining cases of CSU, IgE,
FceRI, and mast cells are also likely to play essential pathologic
roles, although the causative factors have not been identified.

or autoreactive IgE antibodies against au
 

 

Autoimmune processes might be the primary cause of most
cases of CSU. Thus, for those cases with a clear autoimmune

 

Table 1 - Characteristics of 11 patients who showed improvement in symptoms.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

No Sex Age,y Duration Angioedema Antithyroid Previous Treat- ASST Allergies Effect
of urticaria Antibody ment (Rhinitis)
1 F 4l 2y Yes + H1 Pred Mont + Parietaria ft
2 F 36 ly No - H1 - Grass, Olive t
3 FE 27 5 mo No - H1 - Cypress i)
4 F 35 3y Yes + H1 Pred + Grass, Olive t
5 F 39 7 mo No - H1 - No ih
6 M 57 ly No - H1 - No i)
z F 21 2y Yes + H1 Mont - Grass, t
House dust mite
F 46 4 mo No n.d. H1 - No ih
M 44 Oy Yes n.d. H1 Pred Mont + Grass, Olive, t
Cypress
10 F 39 ly No - H1 Pred + House dust mite, tt
Grass
11 F 47 6 mo Yes + H1 + House dust mite ttt

 

 

 

F = female; M = male; y = years; mo = months; H1 = H1-antihistamines; Pred = prednisone; Mont = montelukast; ASST = autologous serum skin test; Effect = over change in
clinical symptoms after Probiotics treatment; mild clinical improvement (¢), significant clinical improvement (ff), complete remission of urticarial (ft); n.d. = not done
186

E. Nettis, E. Di Leo, A. Pastore, M. Distaso, I. Zaza, M. Vacca, L. Macchia, A. Vacca

 

cause, the reduction of the IgE by the action of Probiotics
yields the observed therapeutic efficacy. Even for those cases
that involve autoimmune response and autoreactive IgE antibodies subtly, they still involve the central pathologic axis of
IgE-FceRI-mast cells, and Probiotics similarly render therapeutic effects (27,28).

The inflammatory response in the nasal mucosa in subjects with
allergic rhinitis challenged intranasally with an allergen includes
an immediate IgE-mediated mast cell response as well as a latephase response characterized by recruitment of eosinophils, basophils, and T cells expressing Th2 cytokines including IL-4, a
switch factor for IgE synthesis, and IL-5, an eosinophil growth
factor. Recent advances have suggested that additional pathways
may contribute to the pathophysiology of allergic rhinitis including local synthesis of IgE in the nasal mucosa (29).

Several studies demonstrated that Probiotics may alleviate the
symptoms caused by allergic rhinitis. A meta-analysis described
the results of 12 randomized clinical trials with probiotics in
AR: in nine of the 12 trials, there were some improvements in
clinical outcomes including nasal or ocular symptoms (30).
These data suggest that Probiotic therapy might be more effective in those patients with IgE-mediated allergic rhinitis associated with CSU.

The safety profile for the probiotic strain over 8 weeks of treatment in our patients was consistent with previous observations
in patients treated with probiotic supplement (31).

Future studies should include a larger number of patients and
have a double blind placebo-controlled design. The allergic setting is linked to the disruption of the Th1/Th2 balance with
a Th2 profile; as a consequence, the production of IL-4, II-5,
or IL-13 by Th2 lymphocytes contributes to the development
and maintenance of the allergic response. Probiotic strains, like
Bifidobacterium breve BRO3 and Lactobacillus salivarius LSO1,
able to induce massive secretion of IL-10 by human PBMCs of
subjects with allergic asthma and to down-regulate the secretion
of TGF-, IL-13, and IL-17 in asthmatic subjects, may lead to
the rebalancing of Th1/Th2 ratio and to the improvement of allergic symptoms and could limit the proinflammatory response,
simultaneously improving the process of maintaining the state
of tolerance to external antigens (32).

In addition, further studies are needed to help better identify
clinical and laboratory predictors of response.

In conclusion, our study suggests that a combination of 2 probiotics (Lactobacillus salivarius LSO1 and. Bifidobacterium breve
BRO3) administered twice daily for 8 weeks might reduce the
symptom scores and quality of life scores in a part of patients
with CSU who remained symptomatic despite treatment with
H1 antihistamine, mostly in subjects with allergic rhinitis. The
probiotic approach might represent a new well tolerated option
in the treatment of CSU.

References

1.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

Lhe

18.

Nettis E, Pannofino A, D’Aprile C, Ferrannini A, Tursi A. Clinical
and aetiological aspects in urticaria and angio-oedema. Br J Dermatol. 2003;148(3):501-6.
Greaves MW. Chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2000;105:664-723.
O'Donnell BE, Lawlor FE, Simpson J, Morgan M, Greaves MW.
The impact of chronic urticaria on the quality of life. Br J Dermatol. 1997;136:197-201.
Zuberbier T, Aberer W, Asero R et al. The EAACI/GA(2) LEN/
EDF/WAO Guideline for the definition, classification, diagnosis,
and management of urticaria: the 2013 revision and update. Allergy. 2014;69(7):868-87.
fettis E, Colanardi MC, Barra L, Ferrannini A, Vacca A, Tursi A.
Levocetirizine in the treatment of chronic idiopat
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Br J Dermatol. 2006;154(3):533-38.
ettis E, Delle Donne P, Di Leo E, Calogiuri GE, Ferrannini A,
Vacca A. Rupatadine for the treatment of urticaria. Expert Opin
harmacother. 2013;14(13):1807-13.
Zuberbier T, Bindslev-Jensen C, Canonica W et al. EAACI/GA2LEN/EDE. EAACI/GA2LEN/EDF guideline: management of
urticaria. Allergy. 2006;61:319-21.
ettis E, Colanardi MC, Paradiso MT, Ferrannini A. Desloratadine in combination with montelukast in the treatment of chronic
urticaria: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study.
Clin Exp Allergy. 2004;34(9):1401-7.
Di Leo E, Nettis E, Aloia AM, Moschetta M, Carbonara M, Dammacco F, Vacca A. Cyclosporin-A efficacy in chronic idiopathic
urticaria. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2011;24(1):195-200.
Drago L, Nicola L, Iemoli E, Banfi G, De Vecchi E. Strain-dependent release of cytokines modulated by Lactobacillus salivarius human isolates in an in vitro model. BMC Res Notes. 2010;3:44-7.
emoli E, Trabattoni D, Parisotto S et al. Probiotics reduce gut microbial translocation and improve adult atopic dermatitis. J Clin
Gastroenterol. 2012;46:S33-S40.
Chang TW, Chen C, Lin CJ, Metz M, Church MK, Maurer M. The potential pharmacologic mechanisms of omalizumab
in patients with chronic spontaneous urticaria. J Allergy Clin
Immunol. 2014;pii:S0091-6749(14)00657-5. doi: 10.1016/j.
jaci.2014.04.036.
Vervloet D, Pradal M. Drug Allergy. Uppsala: Kabi Pharmacia. 1992.
Nettis E, Dambra P, D’Oronzio L et al. Reactivity to autologous
serum skin test and clinical features in chronic idiopathic urticaria.
Clin Exp Dermatol. 2002;27(1):29-31.
Mathias SD, Crosby RD, Zazzali JL, Maurer M, Saini SS. Evaluating the minimally important difference of the urticaria activity score
and other measures of disease activity in patients with chronic idiopathic urticaria. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2012;108:20-4.
Finlay AY, Khan GK. Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI)—a
simple practical measure for routine clinical use. Clin Exp Dermatol. 1994;19:210-6.
Kaplan AP. Urticaria and angioedema. Wolff K, Goldsmith LA,
Katz SI et al. Fitzpatrick’s dermatology in general medicine (7th
ed.), McGraw-Hill Publishing, New York. 2007;330-43.
Guéniche A, Bastien P, Ovigne JM et al. Bifidobacterium longum lysate, a new ingredient for reactive skin. Exp Dermatol.

2010;19:1-8.

 

ic urticaria: a

 

 

 

 

 
Probiotics and refractory chronic spontaneous urticaria

187

 

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25;

Lew LC, Liong MT. Bioactives from probiotics for dermal health: functions and 377 benefits. J Appl Microbiol.
20133;114:1241-53.

Guéniche A, Philippe D, Bastien P, Blum S, Buyukpamukcu E,
Castiel-Higounenc I. Probiotics for photoprotection. Dermatoendocrinol. 2009;1:275-9.

Foolad N, Brezinski EA, Chase EP, Armstrong AW. Effect of nutrient supplementation on atopic dermatitis in children: a systematic
review of probiotics, prebiotics, formula, and fatty acids. JAMA
Dermatol. 2013;149:350-5.

Kirjavainen PV, Apostolou E, Arvola T, Salminen SJ, Gibson GR,
Isolauri E. Characterizing the composition of intestinal microflora
as a prospective treatment target in infant allergic disease. Immunol Med Microbiol. 2001;32:1-7.

Matszaki T, Chin J. Modulating immune responses with probiotic
bacteria. Immunol Cell Biol. 2000;78:67-73.

Von der Weid T, Bulliard C, Schirin EJ. Induction by a lactic acid
bacterium of a population of CD4+ T cells with low proliferative
capacity that produce transforming growth factor b and interleukin-10. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol. 2001;8:695-701.

Pessi T, Sutas Y, Hurme M, Isolauri E. Interleukin-10 generation in
atopic children following oral Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG. Clin

Exp Allergy. 2000;30:1804-8.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

Bl.

32.

Ngoc LP, Gold DR, Tzianabos AO, Weiss ST, Celedén JC. Cytokines, allergy and asthma. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol.
2005;5:161-6.
Jain S. Pathogenesis of chronic urticaria: an overview. Dermatol
Res Pract. 2014;2014:674709.

Altman K, Chang C. Pathogenic intracellular and autoimmune
mechanisms in urticaria and angioedema. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2013;45(1):47-62.

Feng CH, Miller MD, Simon RA. The united allergic airway: connections between allergic rhinitis, asthma, and chronic sinusitis.
Am J Rhinol Allergy. 2012;26(3):187-90.
Vliagoftis H, Kouranos VD, Betsi GI, Falagas ME. Probiotics for the
treatment of allergic rhinitis and asthma: systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2008;101:570-9.
Costa DJ Marteau P, Amouyal M et al. Efficacy and safety of the
probiotic Lactobacillus paracasei LP-33 in allergic rhinitis: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial (GA2LEN Study).
Eur J Clin Nutr. 2014;68(5):602-7.
Drago L. De Vecchi E, Gabrieli A, De Grandi R, Toscano M.
Immunomodulatory effects of Lactobacillus salivarius LSO1 and
Bifidobacterium breve BRO3, alone and in combination, on Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells of allergic asthmatics. Allergy
Asthma Immunol Res. 2015;7(4):409-13.

 

 

 
