Check for
updates

DR. ANDAC SALMAN (Orcid ID : 0000-0002-6407-926X)

DR. IVAN CHERREZ-OJEDA (Orcid ID : 0000-0002-1610-239X)
DR. MONA AL-AHMAD (Orcid ID : 0000-0003-3720-7032)

DR. SABINE ALTRICHTER (Orcid ID : 0000-0001-9955-385X)

DR. L. KARLA ARRUDA (Orcid ID : 0000-0002-7505-210X)

DR. RICCARDO ASERO (Orcid ID : 0000-0002-8277-1700)

DR. JONATHAN A BERNSTEIN (Orcid ID : 0000-0002-3476-1196)
MRS. MOJCA BIZJAK (Orcid ID : 0000-0003-2595-468X)

DR. HANNA BONNEKOH (Orcid ID : 0000-0002-3567-0149)

PROF. LAURENCE BOUILLET (Orcid ID : 0000-000 1-8245-4767)
DR. ZENON BRZOZA (Orcid ID : 0000-0002-1230-7013)

DR. ROBERTA F. CRIADO (Orcid ID : 0000-0003-2482-3047)

DR. SEMRA DEMIR (Orcid ID : 0000-0003-3449-5868)

DR. ATSUSHI FUKUNAGA (Orcid ID : 0000-0003-2026-8154)
PROF. ANA M GIMENEZ ARNAU (Orcid ID : 0000-0001-9548-5423)
PROF. MAIA GOTUA (Orcid ID : 0000-0003-2497-4 128)

PROF. ALICJA KASPERSKA-ZAJAC (Orcid ID : 0000-0002-2000-0070)
PROF. MITJA KOSNIK (Orcid ID : 0000-0002-4701-7374)

DR. JORGE SANCHEZ (Orcid ID : 0000-0001-6341-783X)

PROF. BULENT E SEKEREL (Orcid ID : 0000-0001-7402-6850)

DR. ANGELE SORIA (Orcid ID : 0000-0002-8726-6658)

PROF. SIMON FRANCIS THOMSEN (Orcid ID : 0000-0002-4838-300X)
DR. ZAHAVA VADASZ (Orcid ID : 0000-0003-2899-5508)

PROF. BETTINA WEDI (Orcid ID : 0000-0002-9868-6308)

DR. PARASKEVI XEPAPADAKI (Orcid ID : 0000-0001-9204-1923)
PROF. ZUOTAO ZHAO (Orcid ID : 0000-0002-9595-6050)

PROF. TORSTEN ZUBERBIER (Orcid ID : 0000-0002-1466-8875)
PROF. MARCUS MAURER (Orcid ID : 0000-0002-4121-481X)

Article type —: Original Article: Atopic Dermatitis, Urticaria and Skin Disease

This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but has not been
through the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process, which may lead to
differences between this version and the Version of Record. Please cite this article as doi:
10.1111/ALL.14687

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Corresponding author mail id : marcus.maurer@charite.de

The global impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the management and course of chronic

urticaria

Corresponding authors:

Marcus Maurer

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Dermatological Allergology, AllergieCentrum-Charité, Dept. of Dermatology and Allergy, Charité — Universitatsmedizin Berlin,

Germany

Emek Kocatiirk
Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Dept. of Dermatology, Kog University
School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey

Key words: chronic urticaria, COVID-19, pandemic, SARS-CoV-2, omalizumab, cyclosporine,
treatment, UCARE

 

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Dept. of

1 | Emek Kocatiirk Dermatology, Kog University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey

 

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of

2 | Andag Salman Dermatology, Marmara University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey

 

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), School of Medicine,
Universidad de Especialidades Espiritu Santo, Samborondon, Ecuador AND

3 | Ivan Cherrez-Ojeda RespiraLab, Research, Guayaquil, Ecuador

 

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Faculdade de
Medicina do ABC, Santo André, Brazil and Alergoskin Alergia e
Dermatologia SS Itda, Santo André, Brazil and UCARE Center, Sdo Paulo,

4 | Paulo Ricardo Criado Brazil

 

 

 

 

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

Jonny Peter

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Division of Allergy
and Clinical Immunology, Department of Medicine, University of Cape

Town, Cape Town 7925, South Africa.

 

Elif Comert-Ozer

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of

Dermatology, Marmara University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey

 

Mohamed Abuzakouk

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Cleveland Clinic Abu

Dhabi, UAE.

 

Rosana Camara Agondi

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), University of Sao

Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil

 

Mona Al-Ahmad

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Microbiology

Department, Faculty of Medicine, Kuwait University, Safat, Kuwait

 

Sabine Altrichter

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Dermatology and Allergy, Charité - Universitatsmedizin Berlin, Berlin,

Germany.

 

Rand Arnaout

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), King Faisal Specialist

Hospital & Research Center, Al Faisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia

 

Luisa Karla Arruda

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Ribeirdo Preto

Medical School, University of Sdo Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil

 

Riccardo Asero

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Ambulatorio di

Allergologia, Clinica San Carlo, Paderno Dugnano (MI), Italy

 

Andrea Bauer

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Dermatology, University Allergy Center, University Hospital Carl Gustav

Carus, Technical University, Dresden, Germany

 

Moshe Ben-Shoshan

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Division of Allergy,
Immunology and Dermatology, Department of Pediatrics, McGill University

Health Center, Montreal, QC, Canada

 

Jonathan A. Bernstein

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine, Division of Immunology, Rheumatology

and Allergy, Cincinnati, USA

 

 

Mojca Bizjak

 

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Division of Allergy,
University Clinic of Respiratory and Allergic Diseases Golnik, Golnik,

Slovenia

 

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved

 
18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

Isabelle Boccon-Gibod

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Clinical
Immunology/Internal Medicine Department, National Reference Center

for Angioedema, Grenoble University Hospital, Grenoble, France

 

Hanna Bonnekoh

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Dermatology and Allergy, Allergie-Centrum-Charité, Charité Universitatsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. And Autoinflammation
Reference Center Charité (ARC2), Charité - Universitatsmedizin Berlin,

Berlin, Germany.

 

Laurence Bouillet

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Clinical
Immunology/Internal Medicine Department, National Reference Center

for Angioedema, Grenoble University Hospital, Grenoble, France

 

Zenon Brzoza

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Internal Medicine with Division of Allergology, Institute of Medical

Sciences, University of Opole, Opole, Poland.

 

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Division of Clinical

 

 

 

Paula Busse Immunology and Allergy, Icahn School at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Universidade
Federal da Bahia, Salvador, Brazil AND Servico de Imunologia, Hospital das
Regis A Campos Clinicas Professor Edgard Santos, Salvador, Brazil
Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), University Hospital
Emily Carne of Wales, Cardiff, UK
Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Niall Conlon Immunology, St James’s Hospital and Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland

 

Roberta F. Criado

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Faculdade de

Medicina do ABC (FMABC), Santo André, Brazil

 

Eduardo M. de Souza

Lima

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence
(UCARE), Hospital Maternidade Therezinha de Jesus, Faculdade de Ciéncias
Médicas e da Saude de Juiz de Fora, (SUPREMA), Minas Gerais, Brazil.

 

 

Semra Demir

 

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Division of Allergy,
Department of Internal Medicine, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul

University, Istanbul, Turkey.

 

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved

 
29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

Joachim Dissemond

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, University of Essen, Essen,

Germany

 

Sibel Dogan Gunaydin

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Dermatology and Venereology, Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University,

Ankara, Turkey

 

Irina Dorofeeva

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Allergy and Immunotherapy, Institute of Immunology FMBA of Russia,

Moscow, Russia

 

Luis Felipe Ensina

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Division of Allergy,
Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, Department of Pediatrics, Federal

University of Sdo Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil

 

Ragip Ertas

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Dermatology, Kayseri City Education and Research Hospital, Kayseri,

Turkey

 

Silvia Mariel Ferrucci

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Ambulatorio di
Dermatologia Allergologica e Professionale, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda

Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano (Ml), Italy

 

Ignasi Figueras-Nart

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), The Dermatology
Department of the Hospital de Bellvitge, Universitat de Barcelona,

Barcelona, Spain

 

Daria Fomina

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Center of Allergy
and Immunology, City Clinical Hospital No.52, Moscow Ministry of
Healthcare, Moscow, Russian Federation AND Department of Allergology
and Clinical Immunology, I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical

University, Moscow, Russian Federation

 

Sylvie M Franken

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of

Dermatology, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

 

Atsushi Fukunaga

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Division of

Dermatology, Kobe University, Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan

 

 

Ana M. Giménez-Arnau

 

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of

Dermatology, Hospital del Mar, IMIM, Universitat Autonoma, Barcelona,

 

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved

 
40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

Spain

 

Kiran Godse

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Dermatology, D Y. Patil University School of Medicine, City Navi, Mumbai,

India

 

Margarida Goncalo

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Clinica de
Dermatologia, Centro Hospitalar Universitario Coimbra and Faculty of

Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal

 

Maia Gotua

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Center of Allergy

and Immunology, Tbilsi, Georgia

 

Clive Grattan

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of

Dermatology, Guys & St Thomas' Hospital, London, United Kingdom.

 

Carole Guillet

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Allergy Unit,
Department of Dermatology, University Hospital of Zurich, Zurich,

Switzerland.

 

Naoko Inomata

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Environmental Immuno-Dermatology, Yokohama City University Graduate

School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan

 

Thilo Jakob

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Dermatology and Allergy, University Medical Center Giessen (UKGM),

Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Giessen, Germany

 

Gul Karakaya

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), School of Medicine,
Dept of Chest Diseases, Adult Allergy Unit, Hacettepe University, 06100
Sihhiye Ankara, Turkey

 

Alicja Kasperska-Zajac

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), European Center for
Diagnosis and Treatment of Urticaria, Medical University of Silesia, Zabrze,

Poland

 

Constance H Katelaris

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Immunology &
Allergy Unit, Department of Medicine, Campbelltown Hospital,

Campbelltown, NSW, Australia

 

 

Mitja KoSnik

 

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Division of Allergy,

University Clinic of Respiratory and Allergic Diseases Golnik, Golnik,

 

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved

 
51

52

53

54

55

56

57

58

59

60

61

Slovenia

 

Dorota Krasowska

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Dermatology, Venereology and Pediatric Dermatology, Medical University

of Lublin, Lublin, Poland.

 

Kanokvalai Kulthanan

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University,
Bangkok, Thailand

 

M. Sendhil Kumaran

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Dermatology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research,

Chandigarh, India

 

Claudia Lang

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Allergy Unit,
Department of Dermatology, University Hospital of Zurich, Zurich,

Switzerland.

 

José Ignacio Larco
Sousa

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Clinica San Felipe,

Lima, Peru

 

Elisavet Lazaridou

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Second department
of Dermatology and Venereology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki,

General Hospital Papageorgiou, Thessaloniki, Greece

 

Tabi Anika Leslie

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of

Dermatology, Royal Free Hospital, London, UK.

 

Undine Lippert

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Dermatology, Venerology und Allergology, Medical Center of University

Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany

 

Oscar Calderon llosa

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of

Allergy, SANNA el Golf, San Isidro, Lima

 

Michael Makris

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Second Department
of Dermatology and Venereology, National and Kapodistrian University of

Athens, University General Hospital “Attikon”, Athens

 

 

Alexander Marsland

 

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Dermatology, The Urticaria Clinic, Salford Royal Foundation Trust,

University of Manchester, Manchester, UK

 

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved

 
62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

Iris V. Medina

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Allergy and Clinical

Immunology Department, Centro Médico Vitae, de Julio, Argentina

 

Raisa Meshkova

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Clinical Immunology and Allergology, Smolensk State Medical University,

Smolensk, Russian Federation

 

Esther Bastos Palitot

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Dermatology, Hospital Universitario Lauro Wanderley, Jodo Pessoa, PB,

Brazil.

 

Claudio A. S. Parisi

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Adults and
Pediatrics Allergy Unit, Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires,

Argentina

 

Julia Pickert

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Clinical &
Experimental Allergology, Department of Dermatology and Allergology,

Philipps University Marburg, Marburg, Germany.

 

German D Ramon

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Instituto de Alergia

e Inmunologia del Sur, Buenos Aires, Argentina

 

Monica Rodriguez
Gonzalez

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of

Allergy, Hospital Espafiol de México, Mexico City, Mexico

 

Nelson Rosario

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Federal University

of Parana, Rua General Carneiro, Curitiba, Brazil

 

Michael Rudenko

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), London Allergy and

Immunology Centre, London, UK

 

Krzysztof Rutkowski

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Allergy, Guy's and St Thomas' Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, London,
United Kingdom.

 

Jorge Sanchez

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Pediatrics, Graduate Program on Allergology, University of Antioquia,

Medellin, Colombia.

 

Sibylle Schliemann

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of

Dermatology , University Hospital Jena , Germany

 

 

Bulent Enis Sekerel

 

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of

Pediatric Allergy, Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara,

 

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved

 
75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

Turkey.

 

Faradiba S. Serpa

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Hospital Santa Casa

de Misericordia de Vitoria, Espirito Santo, Brazil

 

Esther Serra-Baldrich

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Dermatology

Department, Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain

 

Zhiqiang Song

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Dermatology, Southwest Hospital, Army Medical University, Chongqing,
China.

 

Angéle Soria

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Service de
Dermatologie et Allergologie, Hopital Tenon, APHP, Sorbonne Université,

Paris, France

 

Maria Staevska

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Allergy

Sofia Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria

 

Petra Staubach

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of

Dermatology, University Medical Center, Mainz, Germany

 

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), First Department of
Dermatology and Venereology, National and Kapodistrian University of

Athens, "A. Syggros" Hospital, Referral Center of Occupational

 

Anna Tagka Dermatological Diseases, Athens, Greece
Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Dermatology, Graduate School of Biomedical and Health Sciences,
Hiroshima University 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8551,
Shunsuke Takahagi Japan.

 

Simon Francis Thomsen

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of

Dermatology, Bispebjerg Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark

 

Regina Treudler

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Dermatology, Venerology and Allergology and Leipzig Interdisciplinary
Center of Allergology Comprehensive Allergy Center, UMC Leipzig, Leipzig,

Germany

 

 

Zahava Vadasz

 

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Division of Allergy

 

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved

 
86

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

and Clinical Immunology, Bnai-Zion Medical Center, Technion Faculty of

Medicine, Haifa, Israel.

 

Solange Oliveira

Rodrigues Valle

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Federal University
of Rio de Janeiro, Department of Internal Medicine, Immunology Service,

Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

 

Martijn B.A. Van Doorn

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of

Dermatology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

 

Christian Vestergaard

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Aarhus University

Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.

 

Nicola Wagner

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of

Dermatology, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany

 

Dahu Wang

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE),
Dermatovenerological Department, The Second Hospital of HeBei Medical

University, Shijiazhuang, HeBei Province, China.

 

Liangchun Wang

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Dermatology

Department of Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Guangzhou, China

 

Bettina Wedi

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Allergology Division,
Dept. of Dermatology and Allergology, Hannover Medical School,

Hannover, Germany

 

Paraskevi Xepapadaki

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Allergy, 2nd Pediatric Clinic, National and Kapodistrian University of

Athens, Athens, Greece.

 

Esra Yucel

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul

University, Istanbul, Turkey.

 

Anna Zalewska
Janowska

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Chair of Clinical
Immunology and Rheumatology, Department of Psychodermatology,

Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland

 

 

Zuotao Zhao

 

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Dermatology and Venerology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing Key
Laboratory of molecular Diagnosis on Dermatoses and National Clinical

Research Center for Skin and Immune Diseases, , Beijing, China

 

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved

 
Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Department of
Dermatology and Allergy, Allergie-Centrum-Charité, Charité—

97 | Torsten Zuberbier Universitatsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany

 

Urticaria Center of Reference and Excellence (UCARE), Dermatological
Allergology, Allergie-Centrum-Charité, Dept. of Dermatology and Allergy,

98 | Marcus Maurer Charité — Universitatsmedizin Berlin, Germany

 

 

 

 

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Abstract

Introduction: The COVID-19 pandemic dramatically disrupts health care around the globe. The
impact of the pandemic on chronic urticaria (CU) and its management are largely unknown.

Aim: To understand how CU patients are affected by the COVID-19 pandemic; how specialists
alter CU patient management; and the course of CU in patients with COVID-19.

Materials and Methods: Our cross-sectional, international, questionnaire-based, multicenter
UCARE COVID-CU study assessed the impact of the pandemic on patient consultations, remote
treatment, changes in medications, and clinical consequences.

Results: The COVID-19 pandemic severely impairs CU patient care, with less than 50% of the
weekly numbers of patients treated as compared to before the pandemic. Reduced patient referrals
and clinic hours were the major reasons. Almost half of responding UCARE physicians were
involved in COVID-19 patient care, which negatively impacted on the care of urticaria patients.
The rate of face-to-face consultations decreased by 62%, from 90% to less than half, whereas the
rate of remote consultations increased by more than 600%, from one in 10 to more than two
thirds. Cyclosporine and systemic corticosteroids, but not antihistamines or omalizumab, are used
less during the pandemic. CU does not affect the course of COVID-19, but COVID-19 results in
CU exacerbation in one of three patients, with higher rates in patients with severe COVID-19.
Conclusions: The COVID-19 pandemic brings major changes and challenges for CU patients and
their physicians. The long-term consequences of these changes, especially the increased use of

remote consultations, require careful evaluation.

Introduction

Chronic urticaria (CU) is a common disease with more than 50 million patients affected globally
(1). The main effector cells of CU are skin mast cells, often activated by autoimmune
mechanisms. This results in the release of histamine and other mediators with subsequent sensory
nerve activation, vasodilatation and plasma extravasation as well as cell recruitment (2). The firstline treatment of CU are second generation H1-antihistamines, which provide complete control in
less than 50% of the patients, even at up to four-fold doses (3-4). In antihistamine-resistant
patients, treatment with omalizumab, and - if this fails - cyclosporine are the current guideline
recommended therapies of choice (5).

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Since the first months of 2020, severe acute respiratory coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has
spread rapidly across the globe causing the “coronavirus disease 2019” (COVID-19) pandemic,
the worst global public health crisis since the Influenza pandemic more than a hundred years ago.
As of now, more than 30 million patients have been diagnosed with COVID-19 around the world,
with more than 900,000 deaths in 188 countries (6). SARS-CoV-2 leads to an upregulated immune
response in the monocytic-macrophage system, which may produce a severe inflammatory
systemic state, hypercoagulative milieu and damage in lungs as well as other internal organs, the
hematological system, gastrointestinal tract, kidneys, and central nervous system (7).

The COVID-19 pandemic dramatically affects health care systems and patient care.
Patients with CU and their treating physicians are affected by social distancing measures,
lockdowns, travel restrictions and changes in management patterns due to the risk of infection
with SARS-CoV-2. CU is a common and often severe disease. A significant number of CU
patients are being cared for by expert physicians at hospital-based urticaria centers of reference
and excellence (UCAREs) (8). The COVID-19 pandemic prompted frequent queries to UCAREs
from both CU patients and CU treating physicians, especially on the treatment of urticaria with
biologics and immunosuppressive treatment. The most common questions of concerns are whether
treatment of CU might affect the course of COVID-19, whether the treatments or the disease itself
make CU patients more prone to contract COVID-19 or to result in severe COVID-19, whether
COVID-19 aggravates CU, whether the patients can be managed by remote consultations, and
whether involvement of physicians in COVID-19 care will impair urticaria care. As of now, these
questions remain unanswered.

Recently, several scientific societies have issued expert-led practical recommendations on
the management of patients with dermatologic or allergic diseases with type 2 inflammation
including urticaria during the COVID-19 pandemic. These recommendations are based on expert
experience and consensus, rather than evidence from controlled studies. They aim to ensure
patient and healthcare worker safety, and they provide guidance on the use of treatments including
biologics and immunosuppressive treatments (9-11). For instance, the position paper from German
Allergologists and European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology (EAACI)
recommends that treatment of urticaria with omalizumab in patients with mild-to-moderate
COVID-19, or when SARS-CoV-2 infection is suspected, is to be continued if supported by a
patient-based risk-benefit analysis and patient consent. In patients with severe COVID-19,

omalizumab injection interval prolongation or treatment interruption should be considered, taking

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
into account the risk of the possible requirement of systemic glucocorticoids (11). If and how
these recommendations are implemented is currently unknown.

The pathogenesis of severe COVID-19 is characterized by elevated levels of tumor
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a), interleukin-6 (IL-6), IL-1, granulocyte-macrophage colonystimulating factor (GM-CSF) and chemokine (C-C-motif) ligand 2 (CCL2) (12), many of which
are produced and released by mast cells. Indeed, SARS-CoV-2 activates mast cells (13), the key
effector cells in CU, as well other immune cells such as basophils, neutrophils,
monocytes/macrophages, and natural killer cells, and leads to cytokine storm (14). Mast cells can
recognize and respond to viruses through several different receptors, including Toll-like receptors,
Retinoic acid —inducible gene-I-like receptors, FceRI, complement and IL-1 receptors.
Engagement of these receptors results in mast cell activation and degranulation, the de novo
synthesis of eicosanoids as well as numerous cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors (15).
Activation of mast cells in response to viral infection may have protective effects by helping the
immune system or directly fighting the infection. However, worsening of inflammation and severe
disease may occur in case of extensive mast cell activation with increased levels of inflammatory
cytokine and chemokine release (12). Basophils are also involved in the pathogenesis of COVID19 and CU. Basophil numbers are reduced in patients with COVID-19 and levels return to normal
upon remission, similar to chronic spontaneous urticaria, where high disease activity is linked to
basopenia and effective treatment results in normalization of blood basophil numbers (16). These
effects may explain why there are several reports of urticaria and angioedema associated with
COVID-19 infection in the literature and urticaria-like lesions were ranked as the second most
common cutaneous manifestation of COVID-19 infection and reported to be present in 19% of
patients in a series from Spain (17). Also, COVID-19 can lead to exacerbation of CU (18). How
often this happens remains unknown.

With the aim of learning from the experience of urticaria specialists at UCAREs
worldwide, we designed the COVID-CU study to understand how CU patients, their treatment and
course of disease are affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. The focus of COVID-CU is to
characterize the changes that the pandemic has brought for the work of UCARE physicians who

managed their CU patients during the pandemic.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Materials and methods

The COVID-CU study is a cross-sectional, international, multicenter study, in which a 17-item
questionnaire was distributed to all member centers of the UCARE network (see Appendix-1! for
the questionnaire) (Total 110 centers; https://www.ga2len-ucare.com/centers.html) (8).

The demographic characteristics of the participating centers are given in Table 1.

COVID-19 disease severity was defined by using the scale provided by World Health
Organization (19).

Questionnaire design

The questionnaire was developed by the steering committee members of the COVID-CU study
(Emek Kocatiirk, Anda¢ Salman, Jonny Peter, Ivan Cherrez-Ojeda, Paulo Criado, Marcus Maurer)
to query the most prevalent issues that urticaria specialists experience during the COVID-19
pandemic around the world. The focus and selection of questions were based on the evolving
clinical experience with the impact of the pandemic on the management of patients and its impact
on UCARE physicians and patients, as well as on patient and physician queries. The final version
of the survey was approved by all COVID-CU steering committee members. The questionnaire
comprised of 17 questions, focused on the impact of the pandemic on patient consultations, the
implementation of measures for remote treatment, changes in the use of medications, and the

course of COVID-19 in patients with CU.

Questionnaire implementation

The questionnaire was pilot tested by 10 UCAREs before distribution and checked for ease of
comprehension. The accuracy and completeness of the responses were reviewed by the steering
committee prior to wider distribution. The survey included a combination of fill-in- the-blank and

multiple-choice questions.
Questionnaire distribution
Questionnaires were distributed through the UCARE email link to UCARE centers between July

28th and September Ist. Three reminders with one-week intervals were sent.

Questionnaire response rate and respondents

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Of a total of 110 UCAREs, 95 responded to the questionnaire (response rate 86.4%). The majority
of the respondents were from UCAREs at Allergy-Immunology departments (41.1%), were
practicing at university hospitals (61.1%) and were located in Europe (55.8%). Characteristics of

the respondents are presented in Table 1.

Data analysis

 

Quality control of the questionnaire responses was performed. Data were summarized as mean +
standard deviation and median (min.-max.) for continuous variables and frequencies (percentiles)
for categorical variables. Student’s t test or Mann Whitney U test was used for independent group
comparisons, depending on the distributional properties of the data. Paired samples ¢ test was used
for the comparison of means in two related groups. Chi-square test was used for proportions and
its counterpart Fisher’s Exact test was used when the data were sparse. Univariate logistic
regression analysis was also performed to examine risk factors for different dependent variables.
All analyses were performed by IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, Version 20.0. A p value <0.05

was considered as statistically significant.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Results

The COVID-19 pandemic severely impairs CU patient care

During the COVID-19 pandemic, the weekly number of CU patients treated at UCAREs
decreased by more than 50% (mean + SD: 56.6+25.8%; median:60, range: 0-100). One third of all
UCAREs (n = 33; 34.4%), reported a decrease in patient numbers by more than 75%. Only 5% of
UCARESs reported that their patient numbers did not change (n = 5;5.4%; Figure 1a).

 

 

 

 

Reduced patient referrals (n = 57; 61.3%) and urticaria clinic hours (n = 47; 50.6%) were
the major reasons for the decrease in CU patient consultations due to the COVID-19 pandemic
(Figure 1b). Almost half of the responding UCARE physicians were involved in COVID-19
patient care, in in-patient clinics (n = 23; 25.7%), out-patient clinics (16;17.9%), or intensive care
units (n = 3;3.3%) (Table 2). One in four of the affected physicians (n= 14, 23%) agreed or
strongly agreed that these reassignments negatively impacted on the care of urticaria patients at

their UCARE.

The COVID-19 pandemic affects the way UCAREs interact with their patients

Face to face consultations decreased significantly during the pandemic, from 90.2% to 34.2%
(p<0.0005). Instead, more consultations were done via phone calls (35.8%, up from 4.7%; p
<0.0005), WhatsApp (11.5%, up from 3.0%; p<0.0005); e-mail (7.2%, up from 2.5%;), p<0.0005),
and video calls(2.5%, up from 0%; p <0.007)(Figure 2).

The use of patient-reported outcome measures decreased markedly during the COVID-19
pandemic, for the Urticaria activity score /Angioedema activity score from 65.6% to 47.3%, the
Urticaria/Angioedema control test from 62.6% to 42.7%, the Dermatology Life Quality Index
from 33.0% to 15.1%, the Chronic urticaria quality-of-life questionnaire from 30.2% to 10.8%,

and for the Angioedema urticaria quality-of-life questionnaire from 17.9% to 8.9% (all p<0.0005).

Cyclosporine and systemic corticosteroids, but not antihistamines or omalizumab, are used less
during the pandemic

Regarding ongoing treatments, the general approach of most UCAREs during the pandemic was to
discontinue or reduce the dose of systemic corticosteroids (n = 51, 57.3%) and cyclosporine (n =
49, 55.7%) and to continue antihistamine (n = 92; 98.9%) and omalizumab treatment (n = 82,

87.2%; Figure 3).

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
All of the responding UCARE physicians agreed that antihistamines at standard or higher doses
can be continued in CU patients who contract COVID-19, and almost all (92.6%) agreed that
omalizumab can be continued. In contrast, only 24.2% agreed that immunosuppressive treatments
can be continued.

As for the initiation of new treatments during the pandemic, most UCAREs used
cyclosporine (n = 69;78.4%) and systemic corticosteroids (n = 56;61.5%) less often, but

omalizumab as often as before (n = 72; 77.4%; Figure 4).

Chronic urticaria does not appear to affect the course of COVID-19, but COVID-19 results in CU
exacerbation in one of three patients

Of 79 CU patients with COVID-19 (76% female, mean age: 43.0+12.lyears; 18-68), 76 (96%)

 

showed a mild course of COVID-19, with 11% and 89% of them receiving in-patient and outpatient care, respectively. Only 3 patients had severe disease and none died (Table 3). Forty-four
(55.7%) of CU patients were on antihistamines, 26 (32.9%) on omalizumab, and 2 (2.5%) on
cyclosporine at the time of their COVID-19 diagnosis. No change of CU treatment was made in
70.9% of the patients following COVID-19 diagnosis (Table 4). There was no statistically
significant relationship between CU treatment and COVID-19 severity (mild vs severe disease).
The course of CU did not change in 55.7% of the patients, while 36.7% were reported to
experience exacerbation and 7% improved. Patients who experienced exacerbation of their CU
upon contracting COVID-19 more often required hospitalization because of the course of their
COVID-19, in 28% vs 6% of cases. Vice versa, the rate of CU exacerbation in hospitalized

patients was higher than in non-hospitalized patients (73%vs 31%; p<0.05; Table 5).

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Discussion

This is the first study on the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on patients with CU and their care
at specialist centers. Our findings show that the pandemic severely impairs CU patient care at
UCAREs, markedly changes physician patient interactions, and affects how patients are treated.
Our results also indicate that CU is not linked to severe COVID-19, but often worsened by it.

CU is a chronic condition that often comes with fluctuating disease activity and with
severe disease and insufficient treatment response to antihistamines in most patients. Access to
specialized urticaria centers such as UCAREs is therefore crucial, and our data illustrate that this
access is severely restricted by the pandemic, with less than half of patients seen at UCAREs than
before the pandemic. The short- and long-term consequences of this remain to be seen but must be
expected to include deterioration of disease control, increased impairment of quality of life, loss of
productivity, and higher rates of frustration, depression and anxiety in affected patients. Decreased
patient referrals are a main reason for the decline in patient consultations. This suggests that
referring physicians, but also patients, should be informed that it is important to continue to seek
the help of UCAREs. Referring physicians and patients should be made aware of remote
consultation services that UCAREs offer and be encouraged to use them.

How does the COVID-19 pandemic affect the way UCAREs interact with their patients?
During the pandemic, preventive measures have been implemented worldwide to adjust outpatient health care services and decrease direct patient contacts to a minimum, in line with current
recommendations (10). Our study shows that UCAREs are very much on board with this strategy:
The rate of face-to-face consultations decreased by 62%, from 90% of consultations to less than
half, whereas the rate of remote consultations, mainly done by phone calls and WhatsApp,
increased by more than 600%, from one in 10 consultations to more than two thirds. Remote
consultations have been shown to be a useful tool during the COVID-19 pandemic (20,21), but the
long-term consequences of remote care for patients with CU in terms of costs, benefits, impact on
physician/patient relation, data protection and confidentiality, comfort, risk of malpractice, and
effectiveness of disease management remain to be characterized (22,23).

CURICT, a recent UCARE study of the use of internet and communication technologies
(ICTs) by patients with urticaria, found that almost all CU patients have access to ICTs and that
most patients use ICTs regularly to obtain CU-related information (24). As for the interaction of

patients with their physicians, WhatsApp and email were the preferred ICTs, similar to patients

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
with asthma or cancer (25). WhatsApp is the most popular messaging service around the world
and allows smartphone users to exchange texts, images, videos and audio messages (26). In our
study, WhatsApp was the second most preferred ICT used for remote consultations by UCAREs,
after phone calls. The use of WhatsApp comes at low or no costs, but there are concerns of patient
data protection and confidentiality. Clearly, there is a need for the improvement of remote care of
patients and the use of inexpensive, safe, and accessible tools for this.

The reduced use of patient reported outcome measures (PROMs) during the pandemic is a
major cause of concern. PROMs guide treatment decisions and help to monitor treatment
outcomes. Current guidelines recommend the use of PROMs to assess disease activity, impact and
control at every CU patient visit. PROMs may be especially helpful during the current pandemic,
with disease activity, impact and loss of control expected to increase in many patients with CU.
The UCARE network is currently developing means for administering and reviewing CU PROMs
remotely, a timely and much needed effort.

Our study shows that the COVID-19 pandemic does not significantly affect the use of first, second-, and third line therapies for CU at expert centers. Ongoing treatments with
antihistamines and omalizumab were maintained and dosing was not modified by most UCAREs
(98.9% and 87.2%, respectively). Also, the initiation of antihistamine and omalizumab treatment
has not changed at most UCAREs during the pandemic (96.8% and 77.4%, respectively). This is
in line with current recommendations for urticaria and other mast cell-driven diseases (10, 11, 27,
28). With respect to the implementation of international guidelines during the pandemic, the first
three lines of treatments, i.e. a standard-dose antihistamine, an updosed antihistamine, and
omalizumab, should be continued to be used as recommended. The use of immunosuppressive
therapies for CU including the fourth line treatment cyclosporine should be avoided if possible,
emphasizing the need for the development of novel and non-immunosuppressive treatments for
CU.

Given the possible role of mast cells in COVID-19-related lung damage and the results of a
recent study of the effects of H1 and H2 antihistamines in patients with COVID-19, antihistamine
treatment may have added benefit during the pandemic. Although the study was not randomized,
placebo-controlled or blinded, the combined use of H1 and H2 antihistamines led to decreased
mortality compared to literature data in patients with severe to critical pulmonary COVID-19
symptoms (29). The same may be true for omalizumab. A meta-analysis of randomized controlled

trials in chronic spontaneous urticaria showed similar rates of upper respiratory tract infections in

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
omalizumab and placebo-treated patients (30). Also, omalizumab treatment was reported to reduce
disease duration and viral shedding in rhinovirus infection in children with asthma (31), possibly
by enhancing anti-viral immunity via downregulation of the high-affinity Ig E receptor on
plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs), which are essential for anti-viral immune responses (32).
Moreover, recent reports have demonstrated the effective and safe use of omalizumab in COVID19 patients with urticaria, asthma, and urticarial vasculitis (18). Based on these data, the most
recent recommendations by several groups of experts are to continue omalizumab treatment in CU
patients with mild-to-moderate COVID-19 course, or when SARS-CoV-2 infection is suspected,
and to only consider prolongation of the injection interval or treatment interruption in CU patients
with severe COVID-19 course (11). UCAREs share this view, with 93% in agreement that
omalizumab can be continued in CU patients with COVID-19.

In contrast, the majority of UCAREs (78.4% and 61.5%, respectively) reported that they
use cyclosporine and systemic corticosteroids less often since the onset of the pandemic regardless
of whether patients have COVID-19 or not. Ongoing treatments with these agents were
discontinued or the dose was modified in more than 50% of patients. This change in CU
management is supported by the increased risk of infection that comes with these therapies, both
showing strong and non-selective immunosuppressive effects (33,34). Three out of four UCAREs
(76%) agree that immunosuppressive treatments should be discontinued in CU patients with
COVID-19. As of now, there are very few studies on the global impact of the pandemic on other
specialties and patient populations. From what has been published, other specialties and the care
for patients with chronic diseases appear to be affected in similar ways and extent as compared to
what we found to be the case for CU. This also relates to the changes in treatment linked to the
pandemic. A recent study performed among allergists, for example, reported that one third of
participating physicians stopped systemic steroid treatment in their patients with asthma (35).
Another study performed among rheumatologists found that one third of participating physicians
reported that at least 10% of their patients had self-discontinued or reduced their
immunosuppressive medication to mitigate the risk of COVID-19 (36).

Does chronic urticaria affect the course of COVID-19? The results of our study suggest
that this is not the case, but the number of patients analyzed was low. Most COVID-19 patients
show a mild (40%) or moderate course(40%), whereas 15% develop severe disease and need
oxygen support, and 5% have critical disease with respiratory failure, acute respiratory distress

syndrome (ARDS), sepsis and septic shock, thromboembolism, and/or multiorgan failure,

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
including acute kidney injury and cardiac injury (37). Of the 79 patients with CU and COVID-19
in our study, 96% showed a mild course of COVID-19, with 11% and 89% receiving in-patient
and out-patient care, respectively. Only 4% of our CU patients had a severe course of COVID-19.
The course of COVID-19 in CU patients did not seem to be affected by their urticaria treatment.
More data are needed, from CU patients with COVID-19 and age- and sex-matched controls. The
CU patients in our study were mostly young adults and female; features linked to mild COVID-19.

Does COVID-19 affect the course of CU? COVID-19, in more than a third of patients
(36%), resulted in CU exacerbation and exacerbation was more common in patients hospitalized
for COVID-19, i.e. patients with severe COVID-19. From a clinical perspective, this does not
come as a surprise. There are more than 200 reports of acute urticaria associated with COVID-19,
which were reviewed in a recent analysis (38). More than half of these cases of acute urticaria
(55%) presented during or preceding COVID-19 infection, disappeared or improved in most of the
cases in less than one week and responded favorably to treatment with AHs and topical and
systemic corticosteroids. Viral infections, including infections with corona viruses, are known
triggers of CU worsening (39), although more data on the rates and relevance of this are needed.
From a pathomechanistic perspective, mast cells, the key drivers of CU pathogenesis, can be
activated by viruses through toll-like receptors (TLR4, 7 and 9), FceR1 and complement receptors
to release pro-inflammatory mediators and cytokines Both SARS-CoV-1 and -2 induce the release
of IL-6, IL-1, and TNF-a by mast cells, consistent with the inflammatory profile observed
following infection (40). This mechanism may also explain the onset of acute urticaria in COVID19 patients.

Stress may be another factor linking COVID-19 to exacerbation of CU. The COVID-19
pandemic comes with increased rates of elevated levels of psychological distress in the general
population (41) and even higher rates in COVID-19 patients, linked to social isolation, the
psychological impact of a novel severe and potentially fatal illness, concerns about infecting
others, and stigma (42). Stress leads to increased levels of neuropeptides such as substance P,
which activates mast cells via the MRGPRX2. Stress is a well-known trigger of CU exacerbations
(43-46).

The strengths of our study include its global approach and scope, the high response rate of
participating UCAREs, and the comprehensive assessment of the impact of the pandemic on CU
patients and their care at specialist centers. As for limitations, our study of CU patients with

COVID-19 is preliminary, since the number of patients included is low and we did not include

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
controls; our study is a global one, but does not include results from all countries and may,
therefore, not be representative of the situation and CU patient populations in countries without
UCAREs. Clearly, many questions remain to be answered. We need to learn more about the rate
of acute urticaria linked to COVID-19 and the rate of progression to chronicity. More information
is needed on the limitations of remote CU patient care and how to overcome it. Finally, we need to
better understand the interplay between COVID-19 and other viral infections and CU, its
mechanisms and strategies to protect CU patients from COVID-19 induced CU exacerbation.

Our study shows that CU does not appear to increase the risk for a severe course of
COVID-19, even in patients on biological treatment. Physicians who take care of patients with CU
must be aware of the fact that those patients who contract COVID-19 are likely to experience
exacerbation of their CU. It is, therefore, important to help patients to achieve and maintain
control of their disease during the pandemic. We recommend maintaining ongoing treatments with
antihistamines and omalizumab, and to be very cautious with the use of immunosuppressives for

CU.

Acknowledgements
We thank Laura Schwenner for her help in distributing the questionnaire and establishing

communication between UCAREs.

Conflict of interest statement

Dr. Kocaturk has nothing to disclose.; Dr. Salman reports personal fees from Novartis, personal
fees from Ibrahim Etem-Menarini, outside the submitted work; .; Dr. Cherrez-Ojeda reports
grants from Universidad Espiritu Santo, outside the submitted work; .; Dr. Criado reports personal
fees from Novartis, personal fees from Takeda, during the conduct of the study; personal fees
from Novartis, personal fees from Takeda, outside the submitted work; .; Dr. Peter has nothing to
disclose.; Dr. Cémert Ozer has nothing to disclose.; Dr. Abuzakouk has nothing to disclose.; Dr.
Agondi reports other from Novartis , outside the submitted work; .; Dr. Al-Ahmad has nothing to
disclose.; Dr. Altrichter reports grants and personal fees from Allakos, grants and personal fees
from AstraZeneca, grants from CSL Behring, non-financial support from Moxie, grants from
Sanofi, grants from Novartis, outside the submitted work; .; Dr. ARNAOUT has nothing to
disclose.; Dr. Asero has nothing to disclose.; Dr. Bauer reports grants, personal fees and other

from Novartis, personal fees and other from Sanofi, during the conduct of the study; .; Dr. Ben
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Shoshan has nothing to disclose.; Dr. Bernstein reports grants and personal fees from Novartis,
grants and personal fees from Genentech, grants and personal fees from Astra Zeneca, grants and
personal fees from Sanofi Regeneron, grants and personal fees from Allokos, outside the
submitted work; . He is a UCARE member site and a member of the JTF practie parameter
committee.; Dr. Bizjak reports personal fees from Novartis, outside the submitted work; .; Dr.
BOCCON-GIBOD has nothing to disclose.; Dr. Bonnekoh has nothing to disclose.; Dr. Bouillet
reports grants and non-financial support from novartis, grants, personal fees and non-financial
support from takeda, grants and non-financial support from behring, non-financial support from
PHARMING, non-financial support from GSK, outside the submitted work; .; Dr. Brzoza has
nothing to disclose.; Dr. Busse reports grants and personal fees from CSL Behring, grants and
personal fees from Shire/Takada, grants and personal fees from Pharming, personal fees from
Pearl Therapeutics, grants and personal fees from Biocryst, personal fees from CVS Health, grants
and personal fees from Novartis, personal fees from Law offices of Levin, Riback, Adelman and
Flangel, personal fees from Astra Zeneca, personal fees from GSK, grants and personal fees from
ResTORbio, non-financial support from Hereditary Angioedema Association, non-financial
support from American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology , personal fees from
Vedderprice, personal fees from Fresenius, outside the submitted work; .; Dr. Campos has
nothing to disclose.; Dr. Carne has nothing to disclose.; Dr. Conlon reports grants from Novartis,
grants from Takeda, outside the submitted work; .; Dr. Criado reports personal fees from Takeda,
personal fees from Novartis, during the conduct of the study; personal fees from Takeda, personal
fees from Novartis, outside the submitted work; .; Dr. Demir has nothing to disclose.; Dr.
Dissemond reports personal fees and other from Novartis, during the conduct of the study; .; Dr.
Dogan Gunaydin has nothing to disclose.; Dr. Dorofeeva has nothing to disclose.; Dr. ENSINA
reports personal fees from NOVARTIS, personal fees and non-financial support from SANOFI,
outside the submitted work; .; Dr. Ertas has nothing to disclose.; Dr. Ferrucci has nothing to
disclose.; Dr. FFGUERAS NART has nothing to disclose.; Dr. Fomina has nothing to disclose.;
Dr. Franken has nothing to disclose.; Dr. Fukunaga has nothing to disclose.; Dr. Giménez-Arnau
reports grants and personal fees from Uriach Pharma, grants, personal fees and other from
Novartis Pharma , personal fees and other from Sanofi , grants from GSK, grants from Instituto
Carlos III FEDER , personal fees from Menarini , personal fees from Amgen , personal fees from
Thermo Fisher , personal fees from Avene , outside the submitted work; .; Dr. Godse has nothing

to disclose.; Dr. Gongalo reports personal fees from Novartis Pharma, personal fees from Sanofi
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Genzyme , outside the submitted work; .; Dr. Gotua has nothing to disclose.; Dr. Grattan has
nothing to disclose.; Dr. Guillet has nothing to disclose.; Dr. Inomata has nothing to disclose.; Dr.
Jakob reports grants, personal fees and non-financial support from Novartis, during the conduct of
the study; grants, personal fees and non-financial support from ALK Abello, personal fees from
Bencard/Allergy Therapeutics, personal fees from Thermo Fisher, personal fees from Cellgene,
personal fees from Allergopharma, outside the submitted work; .; Dr. Karakaya has nothing to
disclose.; Dr. Kasperska-Zajac has nothing to disclose.; Dr. Katelaris has nothing to disclose.; Dr.
Ko8nik has nothing to disclose.; Dr. Krasowska has nothing to disclose.; Dr. Kulthanan has
nothing to disclose.; Dr. KUMARAN has nothing to disclose. ; Dr. Lang has nothing to disclose.;
Dr. Larco reports personal fees from Novartis, personal fees from Sanofi, personal fees from Faes
Farma, outside the submitted work; .; Dr. Lazaridou has received grants, or honoraria as a speaker
or participant in advisory boards from Abbvie, Novartis, Janssen, Leo-Pharma, Lilly, Sanofi,
Roche, Genesis, UCB, Pfizer; Dr. Leslie reports personal fees from Novartis, personal fees from
Menlo Therapeutics, outside the submitted work; .; Dr. Lippert reports grants, personal fees, nonfinancial support and other from Novartis Pharma GmbH, during the conduct of the study;
personal fees, non-financial support and other from Sanofi Genzyme; personal fees and nonfinancial support from Takeda Pharma GmbH, outside the submitted work .; Dr. Calderon has
nothing to disclose.; Dr. Makris reports personal fees from Novartis, outside the submitted work;
Dr. Marsland reports grants and personal fees from Novartis, personal fees from Roche, personal
fees and non-financial support from Sanofi, personal fees and non-financial support from
Galderma, personal fees from Almirall, outside the submitted work; .; Dr. Palitot has nothing to
disclose.; Dr. Parisi has nothing to disclose.; Dr. Pickert has nothing to disclose.; Dr. Ramon has
nothing to disclose.; Dr. Rodriguez-Gonzalez has nothing to declare; Dr. Rosario has nothing to
declare; Dr. Rudenko has nothing to disclose.; Dr. Rutkowski has nothing to disclose.; Dr.
SANCHEZ has nothing to disclose.; Dr. Schliemann reports grants and personal fees from
Novartis Pharma GmbH, outside the submitted work; .; Dr. Sekerel has nothing to disclose.; Dr.
Serpa has nothing to disclose.; Dr. Serra-Baldrich has nothing to disclose.; Dr. Soria has nothing
to disclose.; Dr. Staevska has nothing to disclose.; Dr. Staubach reports grants, personal fees and
non-financial support from Novartis, personal fees from Dr Pfleger , personal fees from Sanofi,
outside the submitted work; .; Dr. Tagka has nothing to disclose.; Dr. Takahagi reports personal
fees from Novartis Pharma, outside the submitted work;; Dr. Thomsen reports grants and other

from Novartis, during the conduct of the study; .; Dr. Treudler reports grants and personal fees

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
from Sanofi-Genzyme, personal fees from ALK-Abello, personal fees from Takeda, personal fees
from Novartis, grants from Hautnetz Leipzig , other from Fraunhofer-IZI Leipzig, personal fees
from AbbVie, grants from Hautnetz Leipzig/Westsachsen e.V., outside the submitted work; .; Dr.
Vadasz has nothing to disclose.; Dr. Valle has nothing to disclose.; Dr. van Doorn reports personal
fees from Leopharma, grants and personal fees from Novartis, personal fees from Abbvie,
personal fees from BMS, personal fees from Celgene, personal fees from Lilly, personal fees from
MSD, personal fees from Pfizer, personal fees from Sanofi-Genzyme, personal fees from Janssen
Cilag, outside the submitted work; .; Dr. Vestergaard reports grants and personal fees from
Novartis, grants and personal fees from Sanofi, outside the submitted work; .; Dr. Wagner has
nothing to disclose.; Dr. Wang has nothing to disclose.; Dr. Wedi reports grants, personal fees,
non-financial support and other from Novartis, grants, personal fees and non-financial support
from Shire, personal fees from ALK-Abéllo, personal fees from HAL-Allergy, personal fees from
Bencard, personal fees from CSL Behring, personal fees from Leo Pharma, outside the submitted
work; .; Dr. Xepapadaki reports personal fees from Uriach, personal fees from Novartis, personal
fees from Nestle, personal fees from Nutricia, outside the submitted work; .; Dr. Yucel has
nothing to disclose.; Dr. Zalewska-Janowska has nothing to disclose.; Dr.Zhao has nothing to
disclose.R; Dr. Zuberbier reports personal fees from Bayer Health Care, personal fees from
FAES, personal fees from Novartis, personal fees from Henkel, from null, from null, from
Novartis, from Henkel , personal fees from AstraZeneca Fee for talk, personal fees from AbbVie
Fee for talk, personal fees from ALK Fee for talk, personal fees from Almirall Fee for talk,
personal fees from Astellas Fee for talk, personal fees from Bayer Health Care Fee for talk,
personal fees from Bencard Fee for talk, personal fees from Berlin Chemie Fee for talk, personal
fees from FAES Fee for talk, personal fees from HAL Fee for talk, personal fees from Leti Fee
for talk, personal fees from Meda Fee for talk, personal fees from Menarini Fee for talk, personal
fees from Merck Fee for talk, personal fees from MSD Fee for talk, personal fees from Novartis
Fee for talk, personal fees from Pfizer Fee for talk, personal fees from Sanofi Fee for talk,
personal fees from Stallergenes Fee for talk, personal fees from Takeda Fee for talk, personal fees
from Teva Fee for talk, personal fees from UCB Fee for talk, personal fees from Henkel Fee for
talk, personal fees from Kryolan Fee for talk, personal fees from L'Oréal Fee for talk outside the
submitted work; .; Dr. Mauer reports grants and personal fees from Allakos, grants from Amgen,
personal fees from Aralez, grants and personal fees from ArgenX, grants from AstraZeneca,

personal fees from Celldex, grants and personal fees from CSL Behring, grants and personal fees

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
from FAES, grants and personal fees from Genentech, grants and personal fees from

GIINNOVATION, grants from Innate Pharma, grants from Kyowa Kirin, grants from Leo

Pharma, grants from Lilly, grants and personal fees from Menarini, grants and personal fees from

Moxie, grants and personal fees from Novartis, grants from Roche, grants and personal fees from

Sanofi/Regeneron, grants and personal fees from UCB, grants and personal fees from Uriach,

outside the submitted work..

References

1.

6.

7.

Fricke J, Avila G, Keller T, et al. Prevalence of chronic urticaria in children and adults
across the globe: Systematic review with meta-analysis. Allergy. 2020;75(2):423-432.
doi: 10.111 1/all.14037

Zuberbier T, Aberer W, Asero R, et al. The EAACI/GA*LEN/EDF/WAO guideline for the
definition, classification, diagnosis and management of urticaria. Allergy.
2018;73(7):1393-1414. doi:10.1111/all.13397

Guillén-Aguinaga S, Jauregui Presa I, Aguinaga-Ontoso E, Guillén-Grima F, Ferrer M.
Updosing nonsedating antihistamines in patients with chronic spontaneous urticaria: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Dermatol. 2016;175:1153-65.

Kocatiirk E, Can PK, Akbas PE, et al. Management of chronic inducible urticaria
according to the guidelines: A prospective controlled study. J Dermatol Sci.
2017;87(1):60-69. doi:10.1016/j.jdermsci.2017.02.283.

Maurer M, Costa C, Gimenez Arnau A, et al. Antihistamine-resistant chronic spontaneous
urticaria remains undertreated: 2-year data from the AWARE study [published online
ahead of print, 2020 Jul 31].Clin Exp Allergy. 2020;10.1111/cea.13716.
doi:10.1111/cea.13716

Coronavirus Resource Center of the John Hopkins University. Available from:
https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/ Retrieved Semtember 20, 2020.

Criado PR, Abdalla BMZ, de Assis IC, et al. Are the cutaneous manifestations during or
due to SARS-CoV-2 infection/COVID-19 frequent or not? Revision of possible
pathophysiologic mechanisms. Inflamm Res. 2020;69(8):745-756.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
8. Maurer M, Metz M, Bindslev-Jensen C, et al. Definition, aims, and implementation of
GA(2) LEN Urticaria Centers of Reference and Excellence. Allergy. 2016;71(8):12101218. doi:10.1111/all.12901

9. https://www.aad.org/member/practice/coronavirus/clinical-guidance/biologics. Retrieved
on 30 September 2020.

10. Vultaggio A, Agache I, Akdis CA, et al. Considerations on Biologicals for Patients with
allergic disease in times of the COVID-19 pandemic: an EAACI Statement [published
online ahead of print, 2020 Jun 5]. Allergy. 2020;10.1111/all.14407. doi:10.1111/all.14407

11. Klimek L, Pfaar O, Worm M, et al. Use of biologicals in allergic and type-2 inflammatory

ann

diseases during the current COVID-19 pandemic: Position paper of Arzteverband
Deutscher Allergologen (AeDA)‘, Deutsche Gesellschaft fiir Allergologie und Klinische
Immunologie (DGAKI)®, Gesellschaft fiir Padiatrische Allergologie und Umweltmedizin
(GPA)©, Osterreichische Gesellschaft fiir Allergologie und Immunologie (OGAI),
Luxemburgische Gesellschaft fiir Allergologie und Immunologie (LGA, Osterreichische
Gesellschaft fiir Pneumologie (OGP) in co-operation with the German, Austrian, and
Swiss ARIA groups®, and the European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology
(EAACD}. Allergol Select. 2020;4:53-68.

12. Kempuraj D, Selvakumar GP, Ahmed ME, et al. COVID-19, Mast Cells, Cytokine Storm,
Psychological Stress, and Neuroinflammation [published online ahead of print, 2020 Jul
18]. Neuroscientist. 2020;1073858420941476. doi: 10.1177/1073858420941476

13. Kritas, SK, Ronconi, G, Caraffa, A, Gallenga, CE, Ross, R, Conti, P. 2020. Mast cells
contribute to coronavirus-induced inflammation: new anti-inflammatory strategy. J Biol
Regul Homeost Agents 34(1).

14, Azkur, AK, Akdis, M, Azkur, D, Sokolowska, M, van de Veen, W, Bruggen, MC, and
others. 2020. Immune response to SARS-CoV-2 and mechanisms of immunopathological
changes in COVID-19. Allergy. Epub May 12

15. Criado PR, Pagliari C, Criado RFJ, Marques GF, Belda W Jr. What the physicians should
know about mast cells, dendritic cells, urticaria, and omalizumab during COVID-19 or
asymptomatic infections due to SARS-CoV-2? Dermatol Ther. 2020 Jul 25:e14068.

16. Rodriguez L, Pekkarinen PT, Lakshmikanth T, Tan Z, Consiglio CR, Pou C, Chen Y,
Mugabo CH, Nguyen NA, Nowlan K, Strandin T, Levanov L, Mikes J, Wang J, Kantele A,
Hepojoki J, Vapalahti O, Heinonen S, Kekalainen E, Brodin P. Systems-Level

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Immunomonitoring from Acute to Recovery Phase of Severe COVID-19. Cell Rep Med.
2020 Aug 25;1(5):100078.

17. Galvan Casas C, Catala A, Carretero Hernandez G, et al. Classification of cutaneous
manifestations of COVID-19: a rapid retrospective nationwide consensus study in Spain
with 375 cases. Br J Dermatol. 2020 Jul;183(1):71-77.

18. Criado PR, Criado RFJ, Pincelli TP, Yoshimoto TA, Naufal GGA, Abdalla BMZ. Chronic
spontaneous urticaria exacerbation in a patient with COVID-19: rapid and excellent
response to omalizumab. Int J Dermatol. 2020 Aug 17:10.1111/jd.15134. doi:
10.1111/jd.15134.

19. https://www.who.int/publications-detail-redirect/covid-19-therapeutic-trial-synopsis.
Retrieved on 30% September 2020.

20. Portnoy J, Waller M, Elliott T. Telemedicine in the Era of COVID-19. J Allergy Clin
Immunol Pract. 2020 May;8(5):1489-1491. doi: 10.1016/j.jaip.2020.03.008.

21. Smith AC, Thomas E, Snoswell CL, Haydon H, Mehrotra A, Clemensen J, et al.
Telehealth for global emergencies: Implications for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID
19). J Telemed Telecare. 2020 Mar 20;1357633X2091656.

22. Aldunate R, Nussbaum M. Teacher adoption of technology. Comput Hum Behav.
2013;29(3):5 19-524.

23. Ashfaq A, Memon SF, Zehra A, Barry S, Jawed H, Akhtar M, Kirmani W, Malik F,
Khawaja AW, Barry H, Saiyid H, Farooqui N, Khalid S, Abbasi K, Siddiqi R. Knowledge
and Attitude Regarding Telemedicine Among Doctors in Karachi. Cureus. 2020 Feb
9;12(2):e6927. doi: 10.7759/cureus.6927.

24. The Usage, Quality and Relevance of Information and Communications Technologies in
Patients with Chronic Urticaria: A UCARE study World Allergy Organization Journal, in
press.

25. Calderon J, Cherrez A, Ramon GD, Lopez Jove O, Baptist A, Matos E, Morfin Maciel B,
Calero E, Sanchez-Borges M, Cherrez S, Simancas-Racines D, Cherrez Ojeda I.
Information and communication technology use in asthmatic patients: a cross-sectional
study in Latin America. ERJ Open Res. 2017 Jul 12;3(3):00005-2017. doi:
10.1183/23120541.00005-2017.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
26. Most popular global mobile messenger apps as of July 2020, based on number of monthly
active users. Available from: https://www.statista.com/statistics/258749/most-popularglobal-mobile-messenger-apps/. Retrieved September 20, 2020.

27. Salman A, Alper S, Atakan N, et al. Recommendations on the use of systemic treatments
for urticaria and atopic dermatitis during the COVID-19 Pandemic: Statement of
Dermatoallergy Working Group of the Turkish Society of Dermatology. Turkderm-Turk
Arch Dermatol Venereology 2020;54:71-5.

28. Valent P, Akin C, Bonadonna P, et al. Risk and management of patients with mastocytosis
and MCAS in the SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) pandemic: Expert opinions. J Allergy Clin
Immunol. 2020;146(2):300-306. doi:10.1016/j.jaci.2020.06.009

29. Hogan li RB, Hogan Iii RB, Cannon T, et al. Dual-histamine receptor blockade with
cetirizine - famotidine reduces pulmonary symptoms in COVID-19 patients [published
online ahead of print, 2020 Aug 29]. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2020;63:101942.
doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2020.101942

30. Zhao T, Ji CM, Yu MJ, et al. Omalizumab for the treatment of chronic spontaneous
urticaria: a meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. J Allergy Clin Immunol.2016

Jun; 137(6):1742-1750.

3

=

. Esquivel A, Busse WW, Calatroni A, Togias AG, et al. Effects of omalizumab on
Rhinovirus infections, illnesses, and exacerbations of asthma. Am J Respir Crit Care Med

2017 Oct 15;196(8):985-992.

32. Gill MA, Liu AH, Calatroni A, et al. Enhanced plasmacytoid dendritic cell antiviral
responses after omalizumab. J Allergy Clin Immunol.2018 May;141(5):1735-1743.

33. Ghazawi FM, Lim M, Dutz JP, Kirchhof MG. Infection risk of dermatologic therapeutics
during the COVID-19 pandemic: an evidence-based recalibration. Int J Dermatol. 2020
Sep;59(9):1043-1056.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
34. Price KN, Frew JW, Hsiao JL, Shi VY. COVID-19 and
immunomodulator/immunosuppressant use in dermatology.J Am Acad Dermatol.

2020;82(5):e173-e175.

35. Ozturk AB, Bacgioglu A, Soyer O, Civelek E, Sekerel BE, Bavbek S. Change in Allergy
Practice during the COVID-19 Pandemic. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2020 Oct 15:1-4.
doi: 10.1159/000512079. Epub ahead of print. PMID: 33059353.

36. Mehta B, Jannat-Khah D, Mancuso CA, Bass AR, Moezinia CJ, Gibofsky A, Goodman
SM, Ibrahim S. Geographical variations in COVID-19 perceptions and patient
management: a national survey of rheumatologists. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2020 Jul

6;50(5):1049-1054. doi: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2020.06.017.

37. Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia Emergency Response Epidemiology Team. Vital
surveillances: the epidemiological characteristics of an outbreak of 2019 novel coronavirus

disease (COVID-19). China. China CDC Weekly.2020;2(8):113-22.

38. Algaadi SA. Urticaria and COVID-19: A review. Dermatol Ther. 2020 Sep 9:e14290.

39. Imbalzano E, Casciaro M, Quartuccio S, Minciullo PL, Cascio A, Calapai G, Gangemi S.
Association between urticaria and virus infections: A systematic review. Allergy Asthma
Proc. 2016 Jan-Feb;37(1):18-22.

40. Criado PR, Pagliari C, Criado RFJ, Marques GF, Belda W Jr. What the physicians should
know about mast cells, dendritic cells, urticaria, and omalizumab during COVID-19 or

asymptomatic infections due to SARS-CoV-2? Dermatol Ther. 2020 Jul 25:e14068.

4

=

. Xiong J, Lipsitz O, Nasri F, Lui LMW, Gill H, Phan L, Chen-Li D, Iacobucci M, Ho R,
Majeed A, McIntyre RS. Impact of COVID-19 pandemic on mental health in the general
population: A systematic review. J Affect Disord. 2020 Aug 8;277:55-64.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
42. Mazza MG, De Lorenzo R, Conte C, Poletti S, Vai B, Bollettini I, Melloni EMT, Furlan R,
Ciceri F, Rovere-Querini P; COVID-19 BioB Outpatient Clinic Study group, Benedetti F.
Anxiety and depression in COVID-19 survivors: Role of inflammatory and clinical

predictors. Brain Behav Immun. 2020 Jul 30:S0889-1591(20)31606-8.

43. Varghese R, Rajappa M, Chandrashekar L, Kattimani S, Archana M, Munisamy M,
Revathy G, Thappa DM. Association among stress, hypocortisolism, systemic
inflammation, and disease severity in chronic urticaria. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol.
2016 Apr;116(4):344-348.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.anai.2016.01.016. Epub 2016 Feb 20.

44. Dyke SM, Carey BS, Kaminski ER. Effect of stress on basophil function in chronic
idiopathic urticaria. Clin Exp Allergy J Br Soc Allergy Clin Immunol. 2008; 38: 86-89.

45. Basak PY, Erturan I, Yuksel O, Kazanoglu OO, Vural H. Evaluation of serum neuropeptide
levels in patients with chronic urticaria. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol.
2014;80(5):483.

46. Rossing K, Novak N, Mommert S, Pfab F, Gehring M, Wedi B, Kapp A, Raap U. Brainderived neurotrophic factor is increased in serum and skin levels of patients with chronic

spontaneous urticaria. Clin Exp Allergy. 2011;41(10):1392-1399

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Figure la-b: The changes in the number of CU patients seen weekly during the pandemic

and the reason for decrease in number of patients

 

100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
@ Nochange 0%
@ 0-24% decrease
@ 25-49% decrease 1 Patients did not refer to the center
© 50-74% decrease © Decreased days/hours of consultation
@ 75-100% decrease Il Staff involved in COVID-19 care
Change in the number of CU patients seen weekly © Other
(Before vs During Pandemic) The reason for decrease in weekly number of patients

Figure 2: The changes in CU consultation patterns during the pandemic

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
100%

* *: P< 0.0005
rm “P<0.05
om: P > 0.05

1 Before Pandemic

 

 

a BB During Pandemic
60%
40% poy
20% i is
CE! . ri
seek soe * r—
ei ei ee! ||
0% =a,
Face-to-Face Phone Calls Skype Calls Whatsapp Messenger Zoom E-mail Telemedicine software

Figure 3: General approach to ongoing treatments for CU during the pandemic

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
100%

1 Nochange
1B Discontinuation
1 Dose reduction/Interval Extension

80%

60%

40%

20%

 

0%
AHs at standard doses AHs at higher than standard doses Omalizumab Cyclosporine-A Systemic CS

Changes made in the ongoing treatments for CU during the pandemic

Figure 4: Change in the preferences in initiation of treatment for CU during the pandemic

1) Same as before the pandemic
IB Preferred more
I Preferred less

   

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%

AHs at standard doses AHs at higher than standard doses Omalizumab Cyclosporine-A Systemic CS.
Preferences in initiation of treatment for CU during the pandemic

Table 1: Demographic characteristics of responding UCARE physicians (n=95)

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Characteristics % (n)
Allergy-Immunology 62.2 (59)
Specialty! Dermatology 53.7 (51)
Pediatric Allergy 3.2 (3)
Internal Medicine 2.1 (2)
University hospital 81.2 (77)
Practice type! | Private clinic 24.3 (23)
Public hospital 18 (17)
Europe 55.8 (53)
Asia 18.9 (18)
Location South America 18.9 (18)
of UCARE North America 4.2 (4)
Africa 1.1 (1)
Australia/Oceania 1.1 (1)

 

 

 

1More than one answer was possible

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved

 
 

Table 2: The involvement of UCARE personnel in the care of patients with COVID-19

during the pandemic

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

care unit, % (n)

 

 

Responding Other physicians Other UCARE
UCARE physician | at the UCARE personnel!
Not involved, %
61.8 (55) 44.8 (39) 51.8 (43)
(n)
Yes, in outpatient
17.9 (16) 30.8 (26) 20.4 (17)
clinics, % (n)
Yes, in inpatient
25.7 (23) 43.6 (38) 36.1 (30)
clinics, % (n)
Yes, in intensive
3.3 (3) 9.2 (8) 13.2 (11)

 

 

‘e.g. nurse, technician

Table 3: Characteristics of the CU patients diagnosed with COVID-19 (n=79).

 

Characteristics

 

means

LSD/%(n)

 

Mean number of CU patients diagnosed with COVID-19 per center

 

0.78+1

65 (0-10)

 

 

 

 

Mean age 43.04+12.08 (18-68)
Gender Female 75.9 (60)
None 49.4 (38)
Comorbidities
Hypertension 22.1 (17)

 

 

 

 

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Diabetes mellitus 7.8 (6)
Asthma 6.5 (5)
Hypothyroidism 5.2 (4)
Antihistamines at standard doses 21.5 (17)
Antihistamines at higher than standard doses 22.8 (18)
Omalizumab 24 (19)
Active CU treatment Cyclosporine-A 2.5 (2)
at the time of the Omalizumab and antihistamines 10.1 (8)
diagnosis Ligelizumab 1.3 (1)
Methotrexate 1.3 (1)
Omalizumab, antihistamines and systemic
corticosteroids al
Ambulatory 86.1 (68)
Outcome of COVID-19 | Hospitalized-mild disease 10.1 (8)
Hospitalized-severe disease 3.8 (3)
No change 55.7 (44)
The course of CU
during COVID-19 Better 76)
Worse 36.7 (29)

 

 

 

Table 4: Number of patients with a mild course of COVID-19, treated as out- or in-patients

and number of hospitalized patients with severe COVID-19 and the treatment they received

for their CU at the time they were diagnosed with COVID-19.

 

CU treatment

Severity of COVID-19

 

 

 

 

at time of COVID-19 Mild disease Mild disease Severe Disease
diagnosis Out-patient care | Hospitalized Hospitalized*
AHs only! 29 6 Omalizumab? 24 1 2

 

 

 

 

 

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved

 
 

 

 

 

 

Immunosuppression? 3 1 No active treatment 2 - 1
Unspecified 9 - Ligelizumab 1 - 
 

 

 

 

 

‘At standard or higher doses, 2+ AHs, “includes cyclosporine, systemic corticosteroids, methotrexate +AHs
and/or omalizumab. ‘The three patients who were hospitalized were 45, 54, and 65 years old. Two of them
were male. The female patient was obese, the others had no comorbidities. In two of them the CU got

worse.

Table 5: The link of COVID-19 severity and CU exacerbation

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CU Course Non-hospitalized Hospitalized

Better 7.3 (5) 9.1 (1)

No change 61.8 (42) 18.2 (2)

Worse 30.9 (21) 72.7 (8)
Patients with No exacerbation of CU

exacerbation of CU

 

Hospitalized 27.6 (8) 6 (3)

 

 

Non-hospitalized 72.4 (21) 94 (47)

 

 

 

 

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
