SaSDaSIP 1DjN20

?
d
i
1

 

Classification of anti-FceRI and anti-IgE
autoantibodies in chronic idiopathic
urticaria and correlation with disease

severity

Ruth A. Sabroe, MD,? Edda Fiebiger, PhD, David M. Francis, BSc,4

Dieter Maurer, MD,» Paul T. Seed, MSc, C Stat,¢ Clive E. H. Grattan, MA, MD,4
Anne Kobza Black, MD, Georg Sting!, MD, Malcolm W. Greaves, MD, PhD, and
Robert M. Barr, PhD@ London and Norwich, United Kingdom, and Vienna, Austria

Background: Circulating autoantibodies against FceRI, IgE,
or both occur in approximately one third of patients with
chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU), but not all autoantibodies
initiate histamine release.

Objective: We sought to classify patients with CIU into subsets
on the basis of serum bioactivity and immunoreactivity and to
examine the relationship between newly defined subtype and
disease severity.

Methods: Sera from patients with CIU (n = 78), dermographism (n = 15), and cholinergic urticaria (n = 10) and sera
from healthy subjects (n = 39) were analyzed by means of
Western blot analysis for anti-FceRI autoantibodies and for
histamine release from basophils and dermal mast cells. In
vivo reactivity of autologous serum was tested by means of
intradermal injection, and CIU severity was determined on the
basis of clinical interview.

Results: We classified sera from patients with CIU into 5 subsets: immunoreactive histamine-releasing anti-FceRI autoantibodies (n = 20 [26% ]); immunoreactive anti-FceRI autoantibodies without histamine-releasing activity (n = 12 [15%]);
anti-IgE-like autoantibodies (n = 7 [9%]); serum containing a
mast cell-specific histamine-releasing factor (n = 7 [9%]); and
sera with no identifiable factor (n = 32 [41%]). Patients with
serum histamine-releasing activity had more severe urticaria
than patients without such activity. Positive skin test responses
to autologous sera were associated with histamine-releasing
anti-FceRI autoantibodies but not with non-histamine-releasing anti-FceRI autoantibodies. Neither healthy subjects nor
patients with dermographism or cholinergic urticaria had histamine-releasing anti-FceRI autoantibodies.

Conclusion: These data support the specificity of functional

From ®St John’s Institute of Dermatology and ‘the Department of Obstetrics
and Gynaecology, Guy’s, King’s and St Thomas’ School of Medicine,
King’s College London, St Thomas’ Hospital, London; bthe Department of
Dermatology, Division of Immunology, Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
University of Vienna Medical School, Vienna; and “the Department of Dermatology, West Norwich Hospital, Norwich.

The Special Trustees of St Thomas’s Hospital funded work in London, and
the Foundation Rene Touraine supported work in Vienna.

Received for publication March 18, 2002; revised May 11, 2002; accepted for
publication May 28, 2002.

Reprint requests: Ruth A. Sabroe, MD, Department of Dermatology, Barnsley District General Hospital NHS Trust, Gawber Rd, Barnsley, $75 2EP,
United Kingdom.

© 2002 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

0091-6749/2002 $35.00 +0 1/85/126782

doi: 10.1067/mai.2002.126782

492

anti-FceRI autoantibodies to CIU. The identification of distinctive subsets of patients suggests that other pathogenic mechanisms occur in CIU in addition to direct ligation of FceRI by
autoantibodies causing dermal mast cell degranulation. Elucidating these mechanisms might lead to new treatments for
CIU. (J Allergy Clin Immunol 2002;110:492-9.)

Key words: Chronic idiopathic urticaria, Fc€RI, autoantibodies,
histamine, basophils, human dermal mast cells

Chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU) is characterized by
transient cutaneous wheals occurring most days for at
least 6 weeks.! Approximately one third of patients with
CIU have circulating autoantibodies against FceRI.27
These were initially identified on the basis of the release
of histamine from basophils and dermal mast cells in
vitro,?> and their presence subsequently was confirmed
by means of Western blot analysis,4°7 ELISA,> and Bhexosaminidase release from rat basophil leukemia
cells.6 About 10% of patients with CIU have histaminereleasing anti-IgE autoantibodies. The pathogenic
mechanism in the residual 50% to 60% of patients with
CIU remains unknown. Patients with circulating histamine-releasing anti-FceRI autoantibodies, anti-IgE
autoantibodies, or both have more severe urticaria.8

Functional anti-FceRI autoantibodies were thoug!
initially to cause basophil and mast cell degranulation by
means of direct ligation of FceRI.* Subsequently, antiFceRI autoantibodies in CIU were identified as predominantly IgG1 and IgG3 complement-activating isotypes.5
Serum complement inactivation and complement receptor blockade inhibit basophil histamine release by some
CIU sera,>-?:!0 suggesting interaction of FceRI and complement receptor signal transduction pathways, at least in
some patients. Mast cells from different sites differ in
their expression of complement receptors; for example,
mast cells in the skin express C5a receptor, but those in
the lung do not.!! Therefore involvement of complement
might explain the localization of mast cell activation
mainly to the skin in CIU.

We now report the classification of patients with CIU
into 5 groups on the basis of the detection of anti-FceRI
antibodies by means of Western blot analysis and seruminduced histamine release from basophils and cutaneous
mast cells. For the first time we correlate the classification
with in vivo skin reactivity to intradermal injection of

 
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL,
VOLUME 110, NUMBER 3

 

Abbreviations used
cIgE: Chimeric human IgE antinitrophenylacetyl
CIU: Chronic idiopathic urticaria
HSA: Human serum albumin

 

autologous serum and to disease severity. We found minimal evidence for anti-FceRI autoantibodies in patients
with cholinergic urticaria and dermographism, confirming the specificity of functional autoantibodies to CIU.

METHODS
Subjects

Patients with CIU, dermographism, and cholinergic urticaria
were recruited at St John’s Institute of Dermatology. Dermographism and cholinergic urticaria were confirmed by means of standard challenge testing.!? If there was any reason to suspect urticarial vasculitis from the history, a skin biopsy was performed, and if
there were any features suggestive of urticarial vasculitis, such as
leukocytoclasia, patients were excluded. Healthy control subjects
were recruited from the staff at St Thomas’s Hospital. All subjects
were aged 15 years or older and provided written consent after oral
and written explanation. The study was approved by the St Thomas’
Hospital Research Ethics Committee. Relevant drugs were withdrawn before the study: antihistamines by 72 hours (except astemizole by 6 weeks); doxepin and other tricyclic antidepressants by 10
days; and corticosteroids, cyclosporine, and azathioprine by 4
weeks beforehand.

 

Materials

The mouse anti-human FceRI mAb 22E7, which directly crosslinks FceRI and is not inhibited by receptor-bound IgE,!3 was a gift
from Dr R. Chizzonite (Hoffman LaRoche, Nutley, NJ). Soluble
recombinant FceRI o-chain genetically fused to human serum albumin (rHSA-FceRI@) for Western blot analysis was a gift from Dr F.
Kricek (Novartis Research Institute, Vienna, Austria). Rabbit antihuman IgG F(ab’), and rabbit anti-human IgE horseradish peroxidase F(ab’), conjugates were obtained from Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories (Richmond, Calif), and chimeric human IgE
antinitrophenylacetyl (cIgE) was obtained from Serotec (Oxford,
United Kingdom).

 

Assays and skin tests

Western blot analysis for the detection of IgG anti-FceRIo autoantibodies was as described previously.* The reactivity of clgE with
rHSA-FceRIo served as a positive control and was used for semiquantitation of IgG anti-FceRI@ autoantibodies. The relative blot
intensities of IgG to cIgE were used to scale autoantibody serum reactivity in each experiment: 3, IgG more intense than clgE; 2, IgG
equivalent to cIgE; 1, IgG less intense than cIgE; and 0, no detectable
IgG signal. An IgG2a isotype mAb was used as a negative control.

Basophil histamine release assays were as previously described,
using the same basophil donors.23 The poorly IgE-sensitized
basophils of donor 1 (serum IgE level, 1-2 kU/L) were additionally
treated with lactic acid to strip residual receptor-bound IgE to
ensure minimal responsiveness to anti-IgE receptor ligation.!4 The
basophils of donor 2 were fully IgE sensitized. Mast cell histamine
release assays from skin slices were as previously described,? with
each serum assayed in 2 experiments using skin from different
donors. Histamine release was considered positive if 5% or more of
the total histamine was released after correction for spontaneous
histamine release.

 

  

Sabroe et al 493

Autologous serum skin tests were as previously described,!5 with
50 WL of serum injected intradermally into the volar aspect of the
forearm. A positive test result was a red wheal with a diameter of 1.5
mm or greater than that produced by a saline control at 30 minutes.!5

Urticaria severity scores

Urticarial activity was estimated according to the number of
wheals present at the assessment time and scored as follows: 0, no
wheals; 1, 1 to 10 small (<3 cm in diameter) wheals; 2, 10 to 50
small wheals or | to 10 large wheals; 3, more than 50 small wheals
or 10 to 50 large wheals; and 4, virtually covered with wheals.
Severity of itching at its worst was scored on a visual analogue scale
(0-10).8 The distribution of the wheals was scored one each (maximum, 7) for involvement of the face, mouth or tongue, scalp, trunk,
limbs, palms, and soles. Associated symptoms were scored one each
(maximum, 12) for nausea, diarrhea, abdominal pain, indigestion,
wheeze or breathlessness, palpitations, flushing, joint pain, joint
swelling, headache, malaise, and lassitude.8

Statistical analysis

Data were analyzed by using the statistical package Stata, version 6.0 (StataCorp, College Station, Tex). Histamine release and
Western blot scores were compared by using nonparametric tests
and trend analysis. ! Autologous serum skin test data were analyzed
with logit estimates of the odds ratio for a positive test result and
calculation of sensitivities and specificities.!5 Mean clinical activity scores were compared by means of linear regression with robust
standard errors to correct estimates, sensitivities and specificities
with exact CIs, and significance tests for any nonnormality and
unequal variance.

 

RESULTS
Identification of subjects with serum activity

The frequencies of positive skin test responses, seruminduced histamine release assays, and immunoreactive
anti-FceRI autoantibodies detected by means of Western
blot analysis are compared in Table I. Eleven (14%) of 78
sera from patients with CIU were positive in all 5 assays,
whereas 26 (33%) sera were consistently negative. Thirty-nine healthy control subjects, with 2 exceptions, had
negative results in all assays: serum from one released
6% histamine from mast cells, and the second had a positive skin test response. Sera from 3 (20%) of 15 patients
with dermographism had anti-FceRIo autoantibodies, as
determined by means of Western blot analysis (2 scored
1 and | scored 2), but none released histamine from
basophils, and all had negative skin test responses. Sera
from patients with cholinergic urticaria failed to release
histamine from basophils of either donor and were negative on Western blot analysis and skin testing, except for
that from one patient with a positive skin test response
and a Western blot score of 1.

Classification of patients with CIU according
to histamine release and Western blot
reactivity

Sera from the 78 patients with CIU were classified
into 5 subsets according to their predominant histaminereleasing activity and Western blot identification of antiFceRI autoantibodies (Fig 1 and Table II).

$
:
a

ocular diseases

 
494 Sabroe et al J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
SEPTEMBER 2002

A IgE-Stripped basophils

D
fo}

HISTAMINE RELEASE (%)
ie ES
is) So

 

B IgE-Sensitized basophils

Dp
=i

HISTAMINE RELEASE (%)
ooo
3

20

  

C Mast Cells

nN
co}

 

 

 

HISTAMINE
RELEASE (%)

 

WESTERN BLOT SCORE

FIG 1. Patients can be subdivided into 5 categories depending on histamine release assays and Western blot
analysis. Western blot analysis score (0-3) for anti-FceRI autoantibodies in sera from 78 patients with CIU is
plotted against histamine release from IgE-stripped basophils (A), IgE-sensitized basophils (B), and mast
cells in skin slices (C). Histamine release was considered positive if 5% or more of the total histamine was
released, as indicated by the dashed line. Filled circles, \gE-stripped basophils (FceRI histamine release positive); filled inverted triangles, |gE-sensitized basophils (anti-IgE); open squares, mast cell-specific histamine
release; open triangles, no histamine-releasing activity, positive Western blot result (anti-FceRI histamine
release negative); open circles, no histamine-releasing activity, negative Western blot result.
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL,
VOLUME 110, NUMBER 3

Sabroe et al 495

TABLE I. Frequencies of positive test responses in sera from healthy control subjects and patients

 

No. of positive sera

 

Histamine release

 

No. of IgE-stripped IgE-sensitized Western blot
Subjects subjects Skin test basophils basophils Mast cells analysis
Control subjects 39 1 0 0 1 0
Patients with CIU 78 27 21 22 31 32
Dermographic patients 15 0 0 0 NA 3
Cholinergic patients 10 1 0 0 NA 1

 

NA, Not analyzed.

TABLE Il. Classification of 78 sera from patients with CIU by means of histamine release and Western blot reactivity

into putative pathologic groups

 

No. of positive sera

 

Histamine release

 

CIU group IgE-stripped basophils IgE-sensitized basophils Mast cells Western blot analysis No. (%) of patients
Anti-FceRI HR*+ 20 15 20 19 20 (26.9)
Anti-FceRI HR~ 0 0 0 12 12 (16.6)
Anti-IgE 1 % 4 1 7(9)

Mast cell specific 0 0 7 0 7(9)

No identified factor 0 0 0 0 32 (41)

 

HR, Histamine release.

Twenty-one sera from patients with CIU released histamine from IgE-stripped basophils, of which 19 contained anti-FceRI autoantibodies, as determined by
means of Western blot analysis (Fig 1, A). The trend for
higher histamine release with more intense blot scores
was significant (P <.01,n=21). One serum in this group
showed substantially higher histamine release from IgEsensitized than IgE-stripped basophils (see below) and
had a negative Western blot result. The remaining 20 sera
were classified as a histamine-releasing anti-FceRI
autoantibody subset (Table II).

Twenty-two sera, including 15 in the anti-FceRI
autoantibody subset, released histamine from IgE-sensitized basophils (Fig 1, B). In total, 27 sera caused histamine release from IgE-stripped basophils, IgE-sensitized
basophils, or both. The ratio of histamine release from
IgE-sensitized to that from IgE-stripped basophils for
each sera was compared with that induced by the control
anti-FceRI mAb 22E7, the binding of which to FceRI is
not influenced by receptor-bound IgE (Fig 2). Eleven of
the 27 sera had significantly lower histamine release
ratios than 22K7, indicating the presence of anti-FceRI
autoantibodies, the activity of which was inhibited by
receptor-bound IgE.

Conversely, 7 of the 27 sera had a significantly higher
IgE-sensitized to IgE-stripped basophil histamine release
ratio than 22E7 (Fig 2), and all released more than 5%
histamine from IgE-sensitized basophils, indicating antiIgE autoantibody activity (Fig 1, B). All 7 sera except
one released less than 5% histamine from the IgEstripped basophils (Fig 1, A) and, with one other exception, were negative, as determined by means of Western

 

blotting, for immunoreactive anti-FceRI autoantibodies
(Fig 1, B). These 7 sera have been classified as an antiIgE autoantibody subset (Table II). The 2 exceptional
sera showed more than a 4-fold higher histamine release
from IgE-sensitized basophils than from IgE-stripped
basophils and, because of this, have been included in the
anti-IgE antibody subset, although both might also contain anti-FceRI autoantibodies.

Twelve sera contained anti-Fce€RI autoantibodies, as
determined by means of Western blot analysis, but failed
to release histamine from either IgE-stripped basophils,
IgE-sensitized basophils, or skin mast cells (Fig 1).
These sera have been classified as the anti-FceRI histamine release—negative autoantibody subset (Table II).

The magnitude of serum-induced histamine release
from mast cells correlated with histamine release from
the IgE-stripped (r = 0.81, P< .01, n= 78) and IgE-sensitized (r = 0.71, P < .01, n = 78) basophils. All 20 sera
classified as having histamine-releasing anti-FceRI
autoantibodies and 4 of the 7 sera classified as having
anti-IgE autoantibodies induced histamine release from
skin mast cells (Fig 1, C). Of the 12 sera with
immunoreactive anti-FceRI autoantibodies that failed to
induce basophil histamine release, none caused histamine release from mast cells. Seven sera released 5% or
more histamine from mast cells but without histamine
release from IgE-stripped or IgE-sensitized basophils or
evidence of anti-FceRIa autoantibodies, as determined
by means of Western blot analysis, and have been classified as a mast cell-specific histamine-releasing subset. Thirty-two sera had no identifiable activity (Fig 1
and Table II).

 

 
 

496 Sabroe et al

1.33

 

 

coy
®
S y
‘= 1.01
? v
0.69 "y
v

CSR; serena seine
>S Mean ratio
® 0.054 +/- 4SD for
£ MAb 22E7
2 -0.274
(3)
7)
ws -0.595
2 °
& -0.91- :
=
> -1.234 *°
oa e

-1.55

 

FIG 2. Identification of patients with predominant anti-IgE autoantibodies. Variation in the log ratio of histamine release (HR) from
IgE-stripped and IgE-sensitized basophils is plotted for 27 patients
with CIU with serum histamine-releasing activity. The mean log
ratio (t4 SDs) for mAb 22E7 used as a control secretagogue,
which is not competitive with IgE for binding to FceRI, are shown
by solid lines (mean) and dashed lines (+4 SDs; n = 4 experiments
for IgE-stripped and IgE-sensitized basophils). Histamine release
with mAb 22E7 from IgE-stripped and IgE-sensitized basophils
was 23.1% + 3.4% and 26.1% + 3.0% (mean + SD), respectively. As
in Fig 1, filled circles, |\gE-stripped basophils (FceR| histamine
release positive); filled inverted triangles, |gE-sensitized basophils
(anti-IgE).

Autologous serum skin tests

Overall, 27 (35%) of 78 patients with CIU had a positive autologous serum skin test response (Table I). The
odds ratio for a positive skin test response relative to the
patient subset with no identifiable serum factor showed a
strong effect for the histamine-releasing anti-FceRI
autoantibodies patient subset (P > .001) and the anti-IgE
subset (P > .048) but not for the anti-FceRI autoantibody
istamine release—negative or mast cell-specific subsets
(Table III). The specificities and sensitivities of the skin
test for identification of histamine-releasing anti-FceRI
and anti-IgE autoantibodies for the 2 subsets analyzed
individually and combined are shown in Table III. Sera
rom control subjects, with one exception, and from
patients with dermographism and patients with cholinergic urticaria, with one exception, did not result in positive skin test responses.

 

Clinical features

The relationships between a patient’s serum autoimmune activity and measures of CIU severity are shown in
Fig 3. The differences between the mean scores of the 5
serum activity subsets were small for each of the 4 clini
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
SEPTEMBER 2002

cal measures of severity (Table IV). The histaminereleasing anti-FceRI, anti-lgE autoantibody, and mast
cell-specific histamine-releasing factor subsets showed
consistently and significantly more severe clinical measures, both individually and in total, than patients with
histamine release—negative anti-FceRI autoantibodies or
no identifiable serum activity (Table IV). Also, comparison of histamine-releasing and histamine release—negative anti-FceRI autoantibody subsets showed significantly higher disease severity for 2 of 4 clinical measures and
for the overall total score.

DISCUSSION

Differences in immunoreactivity and histamine-releasing activity enabled us to classify sera from patients with
CIU into 5 subsets, implying that there is variation
between patients in the pathogenesis of their CIU. Not all
sera fall neatly into the classification, and 2 sera with
properties suggestive of dual anti-IgE and anti-FceRI
reactivity were included in the anti-IgE subset. Alternate
classification of these sera (in the histamine release—positive anti-FceRI antibody subset for one serum and the
histamine release—negative anti-FceRI antibody subset
for the second) did not affect interpretation of either skin
test or clinical data. We cannot exclude other dual reactivities in serum, such as histamine-releasing anti-FceRI
autoantibodies coexisting with histamine release—negative anti-FceRI autoantibodies or with the mast cell—specific histamine-releasing factor. The underlying pathogenesis for patients with no identifiable factor might
coexist with autoimmunity.

The proportion of sera containing anti-FceRI autoantibodies, as identified by means of Western blot analysis,
but inactive for basophil degranulation was similar to that
found previously by means of ELISA.5 We now demonstrate that these autoantibodies also fail to degranulate
mast cells, indicating that their lack of activity is not
caused by unresponsive basophils but might be due to the
autoantibodies recognizing epitopes on recombinant
FceRI used in immunoassays that are inaccessible on
cell-surface receptors. This might provide one explanation for the lack of correlation between basophil histamine release and Western blot analysis found in a recent
publication, a discrepancy that the authors found difficult
to explain.!° In the current study Western blot analysis
shows that the mast cell-specific histamine-releasing
factor is not an IgG anti-FceRI autoantibody. This substantiates our preliminary findings that the factor was not
an IgG species, although the kinetics for mast cell histamine release were comparable with those associated with
FceRI activation (unpublished data).

Serum histamine-releasing activity is an important
determinant for urticarial severity. All patients in this
study were recruited from a tertiary referral center, and
therefore most had severe urticaria. This might partly
account for the overlap in the severity of clinical features
among the groups. However, mean severity scores ranked
consistently higher for patients with functional autoantiJ ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL Sabroe et al 497
VOLUME 110, NUMBER 3

n=20 n=12 n=7 n=7 n=32
A. Urticarial activity
4

SCORE

 

B Wheal distribution

747 oo a fos)
6 Sass aaa vv tm ~~} eec000000

We 5+ cowee | antanna v a 0000000

S «4 a w ooo 0000000

Bw oo 4 v ‘000
oh 9
4 [)
0

 

 

C Systemic symptoms
12

SCORE

 

 

ocular diseases

8
:
&

 

n=14 n=7 n=4 n=5 n=24
D Maximum itch

10

SCORE

    

    
     
   

Anti-FceRI| Anti-FceRI
HR*

Mast
cell
specific

No
identified
factor

 

CIU SUBSET

FIG 3. Relationship between CIU subset and the severity of clinical features. The CIU subset is plotted
against urticaria activity score (A), wheal distribution score (B), number of associated systemic symptoms
(C), and worst episodes of itching (D). Statistical analysis of data is given in Table IV. As in Fig 1, filled circles, |gE-stripped basophils (FceRI histamine release positive); filled inverted triangles, \gE-sensitized
basophils (anti-IgE); open squares, mast cell-specific histamine release; open triangles, no histaminereleasing activity, positive Western blot result (anti-FceRI histamine release negative); open circles, no histamine-releasing activity, negative Western blot result.
 

498 Sabroe et al

J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
SEPTEMBER 2002

TABLE Ill. Autologous serum skin test results in the 5 putative CIU subsets

 

Versus No identified

 

    

Versus factor, mast cell
No identified specific and anti-FceRI
factor HR- combined
Positive skin Odds ratio (Cl) relative to group Sensitivity, Specificity, Sensitivity, Specificity,
n test response with no identified factor % (Cl) % (Cl) % (Cl) % (Cl)
Anti-FceRI HR* 20 14 10.1 (2.7-31.3) 70 (46-88) 81 (64-93) 61 (39-80) 88 (75-95)
Anti-FceRI HR- 12 2 0.9 (0.1-5.0)
Anti-IgE 7 4 5.8 (1.0-33.0) 40 (12-74) 90 (73-98) 31 (9-61) 93 (82-99)
Mast cell specific 7 1 0.7 (0.1-7.2)
No identified factor 32 6 1
Anti-FceRI* and anti-IgE 27 18 75 (53-90) 74 (56-87) 67 (46-83) 82 (69-92)

 

Relationship is shown between in vivo skin response to autologous serum and the classification of sera from patients with CIU into 5 putative pathologic
groups, as described in Fig 1 and Table II. The sensitivities and specificities are shown for the anti-FceRI histamine release-positive and anti-IgE subsets combined, which was the classification used in our original study to determine the optimum criteria for skin testing.

TABLE IV. Clinical activity scores

 

Mean clinical activity scores

 

Total patients (n = 78)

Total patients (n = 54)

 

Urticaria activity Wheal distribution Systemic symptoms Itching Total score
n (0-4) (0-7) (0-12) n (0-10) (maximum, 4)
A
Anti-FceRI HR* 20 2.5 5.6 4.2 14 9.5 2.8
Anti-FceRI HR- 12 15 5.0 18 7 8.0 21
Anti-IgE 7 2.1 49 3.0 4 9.5 2.6
Mast cell specific 7 2.0 5.1 44 3) 94 2.9.
No activity 32 15 47 2.9 24 8.3 2.1
B
All HR* sera 34 2.3 5.4 4.0 23 9.5 2.7
All HR- sera 44 15 48 2.6 31 8.2 21
(e
Statistical comparisons*
Anti-FceRI HR* vs anti-FceRI HR- 1.0} 0.6 24+ 1.5 0.74
(0.1 to 1.9) (-0.1 to 1.3) (0.8 to 4.1) (-0.3 to 3.3) (0.4 to 1.0)
All HR* vs all HR- 0.8F 0.64 1.4} L3F 0.6+
(0.3 to 1.3) (0.03 to 1.1) (0.1 to 2.7) (0.5to2.1) (0.4 to 0.9)

 

Mean clinical activity scores for patients with CIU are classified in part A as defined in Table II and in part B on the basis of any serum histamine-releasing
activity (IgE-sensitized and/or IgE-stripped basophils and/or mast cells) versus patients with no circulating histamine-releasing activity. Each clinical parameter
was assessed in 78 patients, except for maximum itching, which was assessed in 54 patients. The total score is the sum of 4 normalized mean values (mean
score/possible maximum score). Statistical data shown (part C) has been confined to the 2 most important comparisons.

*Values in part C are given as the difference between means (95% CI).
+Significant difference in subset means.

bodies and those with a mast cell-specific factor than for
patients with non-histamine-releasing serum. The similar
clinical scores for mast cell-specific factor and the antiFceRI and anti-IgE autoimmune patients suggest that it is
mast cell degranulation, rather than basophil degranulation, that is important in disease severity. The autologous
serum skin test provides evidence for cutaneous activity
of serum factors. The criteria for a positive test response
were defined to provide the optimum sensitivity and
specificity for clinical identification of patients with
basophil histamine-releasing anti-FceRI autoantibodies,
anti-IgE autoantibodies, or both.!5 Mast cell histaminereleasing activity of the serum mast cell-specific factor
was not sufficient to elicit a positive skin test response in

this study, although it was initially identified on the basis
of a positive skin test response. The discrepancy might be
due to the stricter criteria now used for the test.

Basophil histamine release by some sera is inhibited
when cell-surface FceRI is saturated with IgE, presumably because epitopes for the anti-FceRI autoantibodies
are at or close to the IgE binding site. This implies that
such anti-FceRI autoantibodies would be inactive in CIU
pathology if mast cell anti-FceRI was saturated with IgE.
Dermal mast cells, however, rarely seem to be fully sensitized with IgE. Mast cells in 90% of skin samples
release similar amounts of histamine when challenged
with the IgE-inhibited anti-FceRI mAb 6F7 as with the
noninhibited mAb 29C6 (17.2% + 8.9% and 15.9% +
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL,
VOLUME 110, NUMBER 3

6.5% [mean + SD], respectively; n = 23; unpublished
data). In the present study all sera containing immunoreactive anti-FceRI autoantibodies that degranulated
basophils also caused mast cell histamine release. Furthermore, there was no association between disease
severity and the ratio of histamine release from IgEstripped and IgE-sensitized basophils. It seems unlikely
that modulation of anti-FceRI activity by mast cell receptor—bound IgE is a major regulatory factor in vivo. However, the failure of 3 sera with putative anti-IgE activity,
on the basis of IgE-sensitized basophil histamine release,
to release histamine from mast cells might be due to
inadequate IgE sensitization of mast cell FceRI.

We did not confirm the presence of anti-IgE antibodies by means of Western blot analysis in this study. However, we have previously published data supporting the
identity of this histamine-releasing factor.2-!7:!8 We have
also independently shown, by means of Western blot
analysis, that anti-IgE antibodies are found in approximately two thirds of patients with atopy or CIU and in
about 20% of the healthy population.4 Thus it is likely
that if we screened the current serum samples for antiIgE antibodies by using this method, we would identify a
high percentage of patients and some of the healthy control subjects with non—histamine-releasing anti-IgE antibodies. We believe that it is the ability of these antibodies to release histamine that is of importance in CIU.

No identifiable circulating factor was found in 41% of
the patients with CIU, a result similar to those of other
studies on autoimmunity in CIU.27 Pathogenic mechanisms in these patients remain unclear but might involve
local generation of mast cell—activating factors or mast
cell dysfunction. Indeed, similar mechanisms might be
responsible for wheal formation in patients (16.6%) with
non-histamine-releasing anti-FceRI autoantibodies. The
failure to detect histamine-releasing anti-FceRI autoantibodies in cholinergic urticaria and dermographism is
consistent with the findings of a recent study!9 and supports the hypothesis that functional anti-FceRI antibodies
are specific to CIU. It is of interest that autoantibodies
were detected by means of Western blot analysis in some
patients with physical urticarias and previously in other
autoimmune diseases,° but these autoantibodies did not
release histamine from basophils.

Treatment of patients with CIU is often variable and
unpredictable, and for some patients, the disease is
refractory to currently available therapies. The efficacy
of different treatments might reflect the underlying
pathologic mechanisms. The ability to identify the subtype of a patient with CIU would help to study and optimize the selection of therapy. This, at present, is difficult
to achieve outside a specialist research clinic. Autologous serum skin testing is a simple clinical procedure. Its
limitations are illustrated in our current and previous
studies,!5 but it might provide useful information if laboratory tests are not available. Of the laboratory tests,
Western blot analysis is probably the easier technique for

Sabroe et al 499

identification of autoimmune patients, particularly if the
specialist reagents required become commercially available. Histamine release assays provide important functional data and have been used as a gold standard to date.
However, they require experience and careful standardization to provide comparable data in different assays,
particularly if different donors are used. Results of all
tests provide helpful information, and choice is likely to
depend on local availability.

We thank Dr F. Kricek, Novartis Research Institute, Vienna, Austria, for the generous gift of rHSA-FceRIo. for Western blot analysis.

REFERENCES

1, Greaves MW. Chronic urticaria. N Engl J Med 1995;332:1767-72.

2. Hide M, Francis DM, Grattan CEH, Hakimi J, Kochan JP, Greaves MW.
Autoantibodies against the high-affinity IgE receptor as a cause of histamine release in chronic urticaria. N Engl J Med 1993;328:1599-604.

3, Niimi N, Francis DM, Kermani F, O’Donnell BF, Hide M, Kobza-Black A,
et al. Dermal mast cell activation by autoantibodies against the high affinity IgE receptor in chronic urticaria. J Invest Dermatol 1996;106:1001-6.

4, Fiebiger E, Maurer D, Holub H, Reininger B, Hartmann G, Woisetschliiger
M, et al. Serum IgG autoantibodies directed against the o chain of FceRI:
a selective marker and pathogenetic factor for a distinct subset of chronic
urticaria patients? J Clin Invest 1995;96:2606-12.

5. Fiebiger E, Hammerschmid F, Sting] G, Maurer D. Anti-FceRIor autoantibodies in autoimmune-mediated disorders. Identification of a structurefunction relationship. J Clin Invest 1998;101:243-51.

6. Tong LJ, Balakrishnan G, Kochan JP, Kinét J-P, Kaplan AP. A\
of autoimmunity in patients with chronic urticaria, J Allergy Clin
Immunol 1997;99:461-5.

7. Ferrer M, Kinat J-P, Kaplan AP. Comparative studies of functional and
binding assays for IgG anti-FceRlo. (o-subunit) in chronic urticaria. J
Allergy Clin Immunol 1998;101:672-6.

8. Sabroe RA, Seed PT, Francis DM, Barr RM, Kobza Black A, Greaves
MW. Chronic idiopathic urticaria: comparison of the clinical features of

sment

 

patients with and without anti-FceRI or anti-IgE autoantibodies. J Am
Acad Dermatol 1999;40:443-50.

9, Ferrer M, Nakazawa K, Kaplan AP. Complement dependence of histamine
release in chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1999;104:169-72.

10. Kikuchi Y, Kaplan AP. Mechanisms of autoimmune activation of
basophils in chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2001;107:1056-62.

11. Flireder W, Agis H, Willheim M, Bankl HC, Maier U, Kishi K, et al. Differential expression of complement receptors on human basophils and
mast cells. Evidence for mast cell heterogeneity and CD88/C5aR expression on skin mast cells. J Immunol 1995;155:3152-60.

12. Kobza Black A, Lawlor F, Greaves MW. Consensus meeting on the definition of physical urticarias and urticarial vasculitis. Clin Exp Dermatol

 

13. Riske F, Hakimi J, Mallamaci M, Griffin M, Pilson B, Tobkes N, et al. High
affinity human IgE receptor (FceRD: analysis of functional domains of the
o-subunit with monoclonal antibodies. J Biol Chem 1991;266:1 1245-51.

14. Pruzansky JJ, Grammar LC, Patterson R, Roberts M. Dissociation of IgE
from receptors on human basophils. 1. Enhanced passive sensitization for
histamine release. J Immunol 1983;131:1949-53.

15. Sabroe RA, Grattan CEH, Francis DM, Barr RM, Kobza Black A,
Greaves MW. The autologous serum skin test: a screening test for autoantibodies in chronic idiopathic urticaria. Br J Dermatol 1999;140:446-52.

16. Cuzick J. A Wilcoxon-type test for trend. Stat Med 1985;4:87-90.

17. Grattan CEH, Francis DM, Hide M, Greaves MW. Detection of circulating histamine releasing autoantibodies with functional properties of antiIgE in chronic urticaria, Clin Exp Allergy 1991;21:695-704.

18. Gruber BL, Baeza ML, Marchese MJ, Agnello V, Kaplan AP. Prevalence
and functional role of anti-IgE autoantibodies in urticarial syndromes. J
Invest Dermatol 1988:90:213-7

19. Zuberbier T, Henz BM, Fiebiger E, Maurer D, Sting! G. Anti-FceRIo: serum
autoantibodies in different subtypes of urticaria, Allergy 2000;55:951-4.

3
3
3
5
3
8

 
