Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 110 (2013) 113-117

 

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

 

ELSEVIER

 

 

Long-term efficacy of fixed-dose omalizumab for patients with severe chronic
spontaneous urticaria

Christine Hahjin Song, MD, FRCPC*; Simon Stern, BSc, MSc‘; Mohana Giruparajah, BSc‘;
Noam Berlin, BSc‘; and Gordon L. Sussman, MD, FRCPC *:+

* Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
‘Gordon Sussman Clinical Research Inc, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
* Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada

 

ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT

 

Article history:
Received for publication September 28,
2012.

Receved in fevised form November 10; Objective: To determine both the short- and long-term efficacy of omalizumab in the treatment of chronic

Accepted for publication November 26, urticaria.

2012. Methods: Sixteen patients with severe chronic spontaneous urticaria at our center received omalizumab,
150 mg every 2 to 4 weeks, between 2010 and 2011. Disease severity was measured by urticaria activity
scores before the first injection, during treatment, and at most recent follow-up, ranging from 9 to
24 months. Duration of therapy was determined individually for each patient. In this retrospective analysis,
outcome measures include number of treatments required to induce remission and long-term remission
sustainability.

Results: Ten patients had remission of urticaria after their first injection (62%). Four patients required 2 to 6
treatments to achieve remission. Two patients discontinued treatment after 2 injections. Of the 14 patients
who initially benefited (88%), 4 remain in remission more than 9 months after their last treatments. Seven
patients continue to achieve remission with maintenance omalizumab, dosed at intervals appropriate for
individual remission duration. Three patients became refractory and discontinued treatment (19%).
Conclusion: Omalizumab is an effective treatment for inducing and maintaining long-term remission for
patients with severe chronic urticaria. Onset of remission is rapid, although duration is variable, with some
patients requiring maintenance treatment. Large-scale randomized trials are necessary to confirm our
findings that support the long-term efficacy of anti-IgE therapy for the treatment of this disease.

© 2013 American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Background: Treatment of chronic urticaria is challenging because many patients are refractory to or
experience adverse effects with conventional therapy. Recently, short-term efficacy of omalizumab has been
demonstrated.

 

Introduction chronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU).'* Chronic urticaria is estimated to account for 25% of total urticaria with a point prevalence
of CSU estimated at 0.5% to 1% of the population.'? Although clinical
course may be variable, the disease can persist for decades,
resulting in reduced quality of life, psychological and emotional
distress due to discomfort and physical disfigurement, loss of
energy, and reduced productivity in the workforce.?4

Current treatment guidelines recommend second-generation

Chronic urticaria is a skin disorder characterized by the sudden
appearance of wheals and the onset of pruritus that persists for
more than 6 weeks. Chronic urticaria without an identifiable cause
is referred to as chronic idiopathic urticaria or, more recently,

Reprints: Gordon L. Sussman, MD, FRCPC, Division of Allergy and Clinical

Immunology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M4V 1R2, Canada; E-mail:
gsussman@rogers.com.

Disclosures: Dr Sussman has received research support from Mast Cell
Pharmaceuticals, Novartis, Stallergenes, Merck, and Schering-Plough and is
a medical adviser and/or has received payment for lectures from Merck, Novartis,
CSL Behring, Pfizer, Anaphylaxis Canada, the Allergy Asthma and Immunology
Society of Ontario, and the Canadian Hereditary Angioedema Network.

Funding Sources: This study was self-funded, and patients paid for the cost of the
medication. There was no industry sponsorship.

nonsedating antihistamines as first-line treatment.'2>° For
patients not responding to first-line treatment, dose escalation is
recommended.” However, the use of higher doses of nonsedating
antihistamines has been found to be only partially effective in small
randomized trials.>” Alternatively, the Société Francaise de Dermatologie recommends that patients who do not achieve complete
remission after 4 to 8 weeks of treatment at the indicated dose
of one nonsedating antihistamine be switched to a different

1081-1206/12/$36.00 - see front matter © 2013 American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.anai.2012.11.022
114 CH. Song et al. / Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 110 (2013) 113—117

medication of the same class.° Other adjunctive agents, including
but not limited to dapsone, hydroxychloroquine, doxepin, and
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), can be considered, but
evidence is largely anecdotal or limited to small studies.° Corticosteroids have been found to be effective, with a rapid onset of relief,
but the adverse events associated with corticosteroids limit their
use. Similarly, cyclosporine may be used as third- or fourth-line
therapy but is not recommended in the long term because of
toxicity.

Omalizumab is a recombinant humanized monoclonal antibody
that inhibits binding of circulating IgE to the high-affinity IgE
receptor (FceRI) on the surface of mast cells and basophils.?
Reduction in surface-bound IgE on FceRI-expressing cells limits
the release of mediators in the allergic response. Treatment with
omalizumab also reduces the number of FceRIs on basophils in
atopic patients.!°"! Omalizumab is currently indicated for patients
with moderate to severe persistent asthma who have a positive
skin test result or in vitro reactivity to a perennial aeroallergen and
whose symptoms are inadequately controlled with inhaled corticosteroids. The dose for omalizumab is determined individually by
the patient’s body weight and IgE level, with 150 mg being the
lowest recommended dose, given every 2 or 4 weeks.!2

Chronic urticaria is generally not caused by allergens. However,
there may be a major subpopulation with an autoimmune IgG
antibody directed to the a-subunit of FceRI or to the IgE itself,
leading to cross-linking of FceRI and subsequent release of histamine.'3-!5 On the basis of this theory, several studies have been
conducted to investigate the potential treatment effects of omalizumab in patients with CSU."?'6-'8 Kaplan et al!? found a statistically significant decrease in the baseline urticaria activity score
(UAS) in patients treated with omalizumab for 16 weeks. In addition,
Vestergaard and Deleuran'® report effective symptom resolution
after cessation of corticosteroid during omalizumab therapy. More
recently, 2 randomized placebo-controlled trials demonstrated
rapid short-term efficacy of omalizumab treatment in patients with
CSU who were followed up for 16 and 24 weeks, respectively.!??°
The current European Academy of Allergology and Clinical Immunology/Global Allergy and Asthma European Network/European
Dermatology Forum/World Allergy Organization treatment guidelines suggest consideration of omalizumab in patients with chronic
urticaria, but its use remains investigational.?*

Since 2010, 16 patients with severe refractory CSU received offlabel treatment with omalizumab at our center. The UASs were
monitored to assess response. Initial response to treatment was
consistent with previous reports, suggesting that omalizumab can

 

 

Table 1
Demographic and baseline clinical characteristics

Patient Sex Age,y Weight, Duration

Pretreatment Thyroid autoantibody Pretreatment

provide rapid and effective relief for patients with CSU. In this
retrospective analysis, we sought to evaluate both the short- and
long-term efficacy of omalizumab in patents with CSU.

Methods

In this retrospective analysis conducted at our community
allergy and immunology center, we examined the clinical data
of 16 patients with severe refractory CSU with daily symptoms
of wheals and pruritus, ranging from 1 to 15 years, who were
prescribed omalizumab between 2010 and 2011. Baseline severity
was determined by UAS7 scores 1 week before first omalizumab
treatment (Table 1). UAS7 is a simple patient-reported scoring
system that captures the severity of pruritus and number of
hives during 1 week.”!2 Intensity of pruritus (range, 0 [none] to 3
[severe]) and the number of hives ratings (range, 0 [none] to 3 [>12
hives]) are recorded daily (maximum, 6 points per day). Scores are
then summed for 1 week to represent the UAS7 (scale, 0-42). Severe
CSU was defined by a baseline UAS7 score greater than 30. Patients
also underwent baseline blood tests, which included total IgE and
thyroid autoantibody screening.

Patients had previously been treated appropriately with various
antihistamines. Cetirizine at doses as high as 60 to 80 mg/d were
used. If patients had a suboptimal response, alternate antihistamines, such as hydroxyzine, doxepin, or desloratadine, were
added. Patients in this study had severe symptoms despite maximal antihistamine doses and were also prescribed various other
second- and third-line therapies, such as danazol, hydroxychloroquine, cyclosporine, IVIG, and prednisone. Thirteen patients
had previously required prednisone to control symptoms. Minimum effective doses of corticosteroids were variable, but some
patients’ conditions were only controlled with prednisone at doses
higher than 15 mg/d. All patients were either refractory to prior
treatments or had experienced significant adverse effects.

Omalizumab has not been approved for the treatment of CSU in
Canada. Patients paid out of pocket for the cost of the medication,
approximately Can$700 per 150-mg treatment. After obtaining
informed consent, patients were treated with omalizumab, 150 mg
subcutaneously every 4 weeks. Alternative dosing frequencies were
determined based on clinical response to treatment. If patients
responded to treatment and required maintenance dosing, the
dosing interval was individualized, sometimes extending to every
6 to 8 weeks. Omalizumab was administered via subcutaneous injection into the left or right arm. Treatment duration was
assessed on an individual basis. Treatment was continued until

 

Previous prednisone No. of previous courses Treatment

 

No. kg of urticaria, y IgE, ug/L test result UAS7 dosages, mg of prednisone frequency, wk
1 FE 47 63 6 183 Negative 38 40 5 4

2 EF 27 57 8 31 Negative a7 20 4 2

a F. 28 69 1 5) Negative 38 20 2 4

4 M 43 94 4 Negative 35 - - 4

5 M 60 108 >13 384 Negative 36 15 10 2

6 M 56 108 1 750 Negative 36 30 2 4

eh F 37 68 6 <4 Positive 37 50 10 4

8 F 66 72 1 <2 Negative 40 10 >20 4

i) M 5S: 95 >10 207.5 Negative 36 6

10 F 5S: 62.7 >10 20.4 Negative ayy 10-20 >10 4

11 F 62 63 >13 i Negative 35 5-20 >20 4

12 M 60 74 4 223 Negative 36 5-10 >20 4

13 z 26 60 e4 62 Negative 36 Once
14 F 35 58 2 256.9 Negative 37 10 10 4

15 F 39 49 15 6.25 Negative 38 5-10 >20 4

16 je 51 54 4 18 Positive 37 10 10 4

Abbreviation: UAS7, urticaria activity score 7.
CH. Song et al. / Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 110 (2013) 113-117 115

 

12 5

10

 

 

CJ

 

 

Number of Patients
a

 

 

0 r

1 treatment

 

3treatments 4-6treatments Discontinued

Figure 1. Number of treatments required for initial complete remission.

a clinical response was seen or until the patient declined further
therapy. Patients who achieved complete remission were given the
option to continue treatment on an as-needed basis. Patients who
benefited from treatment were weaned off oral corticosteroids as
tolerated. Breakthrough symptoms were treated with antihistamines as needed.

Patients were asked to record their UAS7 for at least 1 week
before starting omalizumab therapy and for the duration of their
treatment. All patients who had complete remission at any time
were reassessed to determine whether benefit was sustained. Use
of systemic corticosteroids was also documented. This study was
approved by the Canadian SHIELD Ethics Review Board. Patients
provided oral informed consent to have their data included for
analysis.

Results
Short-term efficacy

Fourteen of the 16 patients experienced significant clinical
improvement during omalizumab treatment (88%). This benefit
was seen with a fixed dose of 150 mg irrespective of patients’
weight and total IgE levels. Ten patients had complete remission of
urticaria after their first injection, defined as a posttreatment UAS7
of 0 within 1 week after the dose. Two patients had complete
remission after the third injection. One patient had remission after
the fifth dose, and 1 patient had remission after the sixth dose. Two
patients did not have improvement in symptoms after 2 doses and
discontinued treatment (patients 8 and 11) (Fig 1).

Long-term Efficacy

Of the 14 patients who initially benefited, 3 remain in complete
remission without requiring maintenance treatment and remain
asymptomatic more than 1 year after the last dose (patients 3, 7,
and 13). One patient has been in remission for 9 months since last
treatment (patient 16). Seven patients continue to achieve remission with maintenance omalizumab dosed at intervals appropriate
for individual remission duration, ranging from 4 to 8 weeks. Three
patients became refractory and discontinued treatment (patients 1,
14, and 15) (Fig 2).

Systemic Corticosteroid Use

Of the 13 patients who previously required long-term prednisone therapy for CSU management, 7 (54%) were able to taper and
remain off prednisone therapy shortly after omalizumab treatment.
Two patients receiving omalizumab maintenance with ongoing
clinical benefit continue to require short courses of prednisone for

12

 

10 +

 

 

With Maintenance
Treatment

 

No Further Treatment

 

Number of Patients
a

 

 

 

i}

Refractory Remission Sustained

Figure 2. Long-term efficacy of omalizumab in patients with CSU. Patients who
initially responded to omalizumab were reassessed up to 24 months after initial
dose.

symptom relief, particularly when their dosing intervals extend
beyond 4 weeks (patients 5 and 6). Two patients who were
considered refractory to omalizumab continue to take prednisone.
One patient who was refractory to omalizumab discontinued
prednisone therapy because of adverse effects but continues to
have daily symptoms (patient 1). One patient who did not have
improvement with omalizumab went into spontaneous remission
and discontinued use of prednisone (patient 8).

Adverse Effects of Omalizumab

One patient had an initial brief flare of urticaria after her first
injection. After the second injection, no improvement was seen,
and she discontinued treatment (patient 8). No other adverse
effects were observed.

Discussion

CSU is a disease that causes significant morbidity, often on
a daily basis. Although first-line nonsedating antihistamines may
be effective for some patients, a substantial proportion of patients
do not respond. Current second- and third-line agents are tried
with varying efficacy and carry significant risk of toxic effects. At
this time, the treatment of CSU with medications other than nonsedating antihistamines is not well standardized and often based
on individual experience. Patients considered for omalizumab
treatment in our center include only those in whom other secondand third-line agents had failed. For many of these patients, treatment with omalizumab may be an effective and safe alternative.

In this retrospective analysis, a rapid onset of action was observed in patients treated with omalizumab, which is consistent
with previous reports.'?? Specifically, 62% of our patients reported
complete remission of urticaria within 1 week after receiving their
first injections. Saini et al’? also reported significant improvement
in patients with CSU treated with a single fixed dose of 300 or
600 mg of omalizumab, whereas no meaningful difference was
noted for the 75-mg group.!? In contrast to their study, patients
in our group were treated with 150 mg of omalizumab regardless
of total IgE levels and body weight. This dose is the minimum
recommended dose for treatment of patients with asthma and
a lower total IgE level (<30 IU/mL).° Conventional theories suggest
that the observed clinical benefit is due to reduction of IgE and
FCeR1 on mast cells and basophils; however, other mechanisms
have been postulated, including an IgE-independent effect on
mast cell and basophil reactivity.'° lemoli et al?4 have proposed
an immunomodulator function of omalizumab with reduction in

 
116 CH. Song et al. / Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 110 (2013) 113-117

B-lymphocyte activation and homing, reduced tumor necrosis
factor « and interleukin 4, and increased interferon y.24 Perhaps
these other mechanisms may be responsible for the observed
benefit in patients receiving the 150-mg dose of omalizumab that is
considered low relative to total IgE.

Although this was not a prospective, randomized, placebocontrolled analysis, this study demonstrates omalizumab to be
effective in maintaining long-term remission for patients with
severe CSU. This study was performed on a subpopulation of
patients with CSU who had severe daily symptoms for years (mean,
6 years; range, 1-15 years), were refractory to conventional treatments, and required oral corticosteroids to function without
disabling symptoms. Four of the 16 patients have remained in
remission despite a time of more than 9 months since their last
injections (patients 3, 7, 13, and 16). Two of these patients have
been asymptomatic even 2 years from the time of their last injections (patients 3 and 7). These patients had urticaria symptoms
lasting from 1 to 6 years. Three of them previously required prednisone, and the one who had not previously taken prednisone had
refused prescribed courses of systemic corticosteroids despite
severe symptoms. The mechanism with which omalizumab may
induce long-term remission is unclear. This study also demonstrates that although most patients with CSU benefit from this
treatment, many may require ongoing maintenance dosing. Of the
11 patients (69% of the total 16 patients) who demonstrated longterm benefit, 64% require ongoing omalizumab maintenance
treatment.

Because our research was self-funded, patients had to pay for
the cost of the medication, and regular dosing intervals that initially
ranged from every 2 to 4 weeks were often extended to every 6 to
8 weeks, depending on patients’ symptoms and willingness to
continue treatment. Two patients had severe urticaria flares when
their dosing intervals were extended beyond 4 weeks, necessitating short courses of prednisone, which were then subsequently
tapered off with their next omalizumab injections. What remains
unknown is if these patients had remained on regular shorter
maintenance dosing intervals, rather than receiving doses on an asneeded basis, if they would continue to develop breakthrough
hives. It is also unclear how long these patients will require ongoing
treatment. The optimal duration of therapy and dosing interval
have not yet been studied in larger placebo-controlled studies. In
the meantime, we propose that patients be assessed on an individual basis.

The rationale for using omalizumab in patients with severe
refractory CSU is that alternative agents, including prednisone, are
associated with significant adverse effects when used in the long
term. Systemic corticosteroids are effective and generally well
tolerated for short courses, and in our practice we treat acute flares
of chronic urticaria with prednisone, 40 mg/d for 1 week, followed
by a slow taper for 1 month. However, most of the patients in our
study were dependent on doses greater than 15 mg/d, for months
to years. For these patients, cushingoid weight changes were
apparent. Patient-reported intolerable mood changes were also
common. In our cohort, 54% of the 16 patients were able to discontinue use of prednisone because their urticaria symptoms
improved while receiving omalizumab. Two patients continue to
receive omalizumab maintenance doses on demand and still
occasionally require short courses of prednisone for acute flares,
though their total prednisone requirements have decreased by
more than 50% since omalizumab treatment. This observation
suggests that omalizumab may be an effective corticosteroidsparing agent for a significant proportion of patients with refractory CSU. Three patients had fixed concerns about toxicity and
adverse effects of prednisone and refused to take even short
courses of oral corticosteroids, despite the appropriate indications
and recommendations.

 

Because of the small patient population in our study, it is difficult to determine any patient characteristics that are predictors of
response to omalizumab treatment. The presence or absence of
thyroid autoantibodies does not appear to be a predictor because
only 2 patients demonstrated antithyroperoxidase antibodies.
Similarly, total IgE, sex, and age did not appear to predict response.
The chronic urticaria index is a nonspecific histamine release assay
in which donor blood cells are mixed with the patient’s serum and
positive and negative control serum. This test is not yet routinely
available and was not performed in our patients. Autologous serum
skin testing is being studied as a tool to better standardize and
stratify patients with CSU but to date has been inconsistent in
correlating urticaria disease severity, treatment outcome, and even
presence of urticaria.2>?° As such, most of our patients did not have
this test performed at baseline.

Two patients discontinued treatment after only 2 doses without
seeing any effect. It is unclear whether they would have seen
a response with further dosing. At this time, it is difficult to define
an optimal trial of omalizumab. On the basis of our results, with
most patients seeing a response within 5 doses, we advocate for
a trial of at least 5 treatments. Interestingly, both of these patients
had required numerous courses of prednisone and frequently relied on long-term doses of 10 to 20 mg/d to control symptoms.
However, other patients in our study required comparable or even
higher cumulative doses of prednisone and benefited from
treatment.

Currently in Canada, omalizumab is not approved for the
treatment of CSU. At the price of approximately Can$750 per
injection, financial consideration for each individual patient is
essential. Until cost-effectiveness analyses are undertaken, it is
difficult to estimate how the cost of anti-IgE therapy compares with
conventional treatment, particularly taking into account the cost of
current first- through third-line treatments, costs associated with
atients’ time off work, disability claims, and emergency department and other hospital resources. Our patients had previously
been refractory to conventional therapy, and many had experienced significant adverse effects, including Cushing syndrome from
rednisone and hemolytic anemia from IVIG treatment. The 7
tients who continue to receive maintenance therapy justify the
current cost of the medication because of its rapid efficacy and
tolerability. Until anti-IgE therapy is approved for patients with
CSU, a significant proportion of such patients without the financial
means are at risk of ongoing debilitating symptoms. Despite the
igh prevalence of CSU, only a proportion of these patients have
daily severe symptoms that are not controlled by other treatments.
Because of the significant costs associated with omalizumab, this
drug should be reserved for such patients with refractory symptoms who do not respond to first- and second-line therapy. In
addition, further studies are needed to help better identify clinical
and laboratory predictors of response.

In conclusion, we propose that omalizumab is an effective,
potentially steroid-sparing therapy for many patients with severe
CSU who have been refractory to other treatments. Its onset of
action is rapid and, for a proportion of patients, may even induce
long-term remission. Others may require long-term therapy with
maintenance dosing at intervals that should be individualized. The
efficacy of omalizumab was observed even at a low dose of 150 mg.
Until more large-scale, placebo-controlled trials address the
optimal duration of treatment, dosing interval, and long-term
patient outcomes, these factors must clinically be assessed on an
individual basis for patients who receive this treatment.

 

References

[1] Greaves MW. Chronic urticaria. N Engl J Med. 1995;332:1767—1772.
[2] Zuberbier T, Asero R, Bindslev-Jensen C, et al. EAACI/GA(2)LEN/EDF/WAO
guideline: management of urticaria. Allergy. 2009;64:1427—1443.
 

 

10

11

12

13

14

15.

 

CH. Song et al. / Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 110 (2013) 113-117 117

Mlynek A, Magerl M, Hanna M, et al. The German version of the chronic
urticaria quality-of-life questionnaire: factor analysis, validation, and initial
clinical findings. Allergy. 2009;64:927—936.

O'Donnell BF, Lawlor F, Simpson J, Morgan M, Greaves MW. The impact of
chronic urticaria on the quality of life. Br J Dermatol. 1997;136:197—201.
Ortonne JP. Chronic urticaria: a comparison of management guidelines. Expert
Opin Pharmacother. 2011;12:2683—2689.

Joint Task Force on Practice Parameters. The diagnosis and management of
urticaria: practice parameter part I: acute urticaria/angioedema part II:
chronic urticaria/angioedema. joint task force on practice parameters. Ann
Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2000;85(6 pt 2):521—544.

Humphreys F, Hunter JA. The characteristics of urticaria in 390 patients. Br J
Dermatol. 1998;138:635—638.

Maurer M, Weller K, Bindslev-Jensen C, et al. Unmet clinical needs in chronic
spontaneous urticaria: a GA(2)LEN task force report. Allergy. 2011;66:
317-330.

Omalizumab product information. http://www.gene.com/gene/products/
information/pdf/xolair-prescribing.pdf. Accessed September 25, 2012.
MacGlashan DW Jr, Bochner BS, Adelman DC, et al. Down-regulation
of fc(epsilon)RI expression on human basophils during in vivo treatment of atopic patients with anti-IgE antibody. J Immunol. 1997;158:
1438-1445.

Beck LA, Marcotte GV, MacGlashan D, Togias A, Saini S. Omalizumab-induced
reductions in mast cell FceRI expression and function. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2004;114:527—530.

Global Initiative for Asthma. http://www.ginasthma.org/uploads/users/files/
GINA_Report2011_May4.pdf. Accessed September 25, 2012.

Kaplan AP, Joseph K, Maykut RJ, Geba GP, Zeldin RK. Treatment of chronic
autoimmune urticaria with omalizumab. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2008;122:
569-573.

Gruber BL, Baeza ML, Marchese MJ, Agnello V, Kaplan AP. Prevalence and
functional role of anti-IgE autoantibodies in urticarial syndromes. J Invest
Dermatol. 1988;90:213—217.

Sabroe RA, Fiebiger E, Francis DM, et al. Classification of anti-FceRI and antiIgE autoantibodies in chronic idiopathic urticaria and correlation with disease
severity. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2002;110:492—499.

 

16

20

21

22.

23

24)

25,

26

 

Groffik A, Mitzel-Kaoukhov H, Mager! M, Maurer M, Staubach P. Omalizumab:
an effective and safe treatment of therapy-resistant chronic spontaneous
urticaria. Allergy. 2011;66:303—305.

Mager! M, Staubach P, Altrichter S, et al. Effective treatment of therapyresistant chronic spontaneous urticaria with omalizumab. J Allergy Clin
Immunol. 2010;126:665—666.

Vestergaard C, Deleuran M. Two cases of severe refractory chronic idiopathic
urticaria treated with omalizumab. Acta Derm Venereol. 2010;90:443—444.
Saini S, Rosen KE, Hsieh HJ, et al. A randomized, placebo-controlled, doseranging study of single-dose omalizumab in patients with H;-antihistaminerefractory chronic idiopathic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011;128:
567-573.

Maurer M, Altrichter S, Bieber T, et al. Efficacy and safety of omalizumab in
patients with chronic urticaria who exhibit IgE against thyroperoxidase.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011;128:202—209.

Mathias SD, Dreskin SC, Kaplan A, Saini SS, Spector S, Rosen KE. Development
of a daily diary for patients with chronic idiopathic urticaria. Ann Allergy
Asthma Immunol. 2010;105:142—148.

Mathias SD, Crosby RD, Zazzali JL, Maurer M, Saini SS. Evaluating the minimally important difference of the urticaria activity score and other measures
of disease activity in patients with chronic idiopathic urticaria. Ann Allergy
Asthma Immunol. 2012;108:20—24.

Buyukozturk S, Gelincik A, Demirturk M, Kocaturk E, Colakoglu B, Dal M.
Omalizumab markedly improves urticaria activity scores and quality of life
scores in chronic spontaneous urticaria patients: a real life survey. J Dermatol.
2012;39:439—442.

Iemoli E, Piconi S, Fusi A, Borgonovo L, Borelli M, Trabattoni D. Immunological
effects of omalizumab in chronic urticaria: a case report. J Investig Allergol Clin
Immunol. 2010;20:252—254.

Hollander SM, Joo SS, Wedner HJ. Factors that predict the success of cyclosporine treatment for chronic urticaria. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2011;
107:523—528.

Taskapan O, Kutlu A, Karabudak O. Evaluation of autologous serum skin
test results in patients with chronic idiopathic urticaria, allergic/nonallergic asthma or rhinitis and healthy people. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2008;
33:754—758.
