Received Date : 11-Jan-2016
Revised Date : 27-Apr-2016
Accepted Date : 10-May-2016
Article type —_: Original

Phenotypical characterization of children with hypersensitivity reactions to NSAIDs

Authors: Cousin Mathias, MD!, Chiriac Anca, MD!”, Molinari Nicolas, PhD*, Demoly

Pascal, PhD!”, Caimmi Davide, Mb!”

Affiliations:

" Unité dallergologie, Département de Pneumologie et Addictologie, Hépital Arnaud de
Villeneuve, CHRU de Montpellier, France

> Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Paris 06, UMR-S 1136, IPLESP, Equipe EPAR, F-75013
Paris, France

> Département de Statistiques, IMAG UMR5149 S, CHRU de Montpellier, Montpellier,

France

Running title: NSAIDs hypersensitivity in Pediatrics

Corresponding Author: Davide Caimmi, Service d’allergologie, CHRU de Montpellier,
H6pital Arnaud de Villeneuve, 371, Av. du Doyen Gaston Giraud, 34295 Montpellier CEDEX

5, tel : +33630061134, fax : +33467330740, e-mail : davide.caimmi@ gmail.com

This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but has not
been through the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process, which may
lead to differences between this version and the Version of Record. Please cite this article as
doi: 10.1111/pai.12596

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Abstract

Cousin M, Chiriac A, Molinari N, Demoly P, Caimmi D.

Phenotypical characterization of children with hypersensitivity reactions to NSAIDs

Pediatr Allergy Immunol

Background. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are the main cause of druginduced hypersensitivity in children. Many classifications have been proposed, focusing on
adults. So far, no large study has deeply investigated a pediatric cohort. The aim of the
present study was to describe a population of NSAID hypersensitive patients reporting a
reaction during their childhood, and to verify if it is possible to classify pediatric patients,
following the EAACI/ENDA classification.

Methods. We conducted a historical-prospective study including patients evaluated from
1996 to 2015 in the allergy unit of the Montpellier University Hospital. We included 635
patients. For each patient, we recorded clinical manifestations and possible co-morbidities,
and tried to identify possible risk factors.

Results. NSAIDs hypersensitivity was diagnosed in 107 out of 635 patients (16.9%). In this
group, 43 patients (40.2%) could not be classified following the ENDA recommendations.
The main discrepancies were on the patients’ clinical manifestations and on their possible
underlying diseases. We identified, on a multivariate analysis, some risk factors for NSAID
hypersensitivity: chronic urticaria (OR 7.737, 3.375-18.296 95%CD), atopic status (OR 2.514,
1.504-4.364 95%CD and allergic rhino-conjunctivitis (OR 1.799, 1.138-2.837 95%CI). On
the basis of our results, we are proposing an adapted classification for NSAIDs
hypersensitivity in children.

Conclusions. The current ENDA classification does not seem to be adapted for pediatric
patients; a modified version does. Our study could help allergists better understand the
differences between adults and children in developing hypersensitivity reactions to NSAIDs
but further large-scale prospective longitudinal analyses are required to validate this new
classification.

Key Words: drug hypersensitivity, NSAIDs, children, classification, drug allergy.

The Authors have no conflict of interest to declare for the present paper.

Introduction
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are widely used to treat fever and pain in

children. Nevertheless, they are currently considered as the first cause of drug-induced

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
hypersensitivity (HS) reactions in children (1, 2). Two different mechanisms are able to elicit
HS reactions: immunological mechanisms responsible for allergic HS reactions (such as IgE
and T-cells mediated reactions); and non-immunologic ones (mainly due to cyclooxygenases
inhibition). Several classifications have been proposed for NSAIDs HS, but no large study

has so far tried to classify NSAIDs HS focusing only on a pediatric population.

In 2001, Stevenson classified patients according to their clinical history but this classification
did not take into account the reactions recorded during drug provocation tests (DPTs) (3).
Thereafter, Quiralte proposed a classification with seven groups according to the patient’s
underlying disease (4). The most recent NSAIDs HS classification highlighted five groups of
patients, and has been published by the European Network for Drug Allergy (ENDA) group,
an EAACI drug allergy Interest Group (5). This classification was based on the authors’
expertise in hypersensitivity reactions to NSAIDs. The publication does not differentiate
between age groups, and it has to be underlined that most of the expertise comes from
adolescents and adults. Since its publication, clinical observations and literature data (6)
reported that some patients diagnosed with NSAIDs HS could not be classified into the
possible phenotypes described by the ENDA group (5). Moreover, while the Widal’s
syndrome (or Samter’s triad) is used as a reference phenotype for the first group of the ENDA
classification, ““NSAID’s-exacerbated respiratory disease”, it is known that such a syndrome
has never been described before the age of 13 (7). In addition, a recent paper (1) reported that
the association of cutaneous and respiratory symptoms is frequently observed in children with
NSAIDs HS, which is a combination of different phenotypes proposed by the current

classification, but is not highlighted as a single group.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Considering the hypothesis that HS phenotypes may differ between the adult and pediatric
population, the aim of the present study was to describe a population of children with a
diagnosis of NSAIDs HS, and to try to classify them on the basis of the current ENDA
recommendation. We also tried to identify possible risk factors for NSAIDs HS in children,

and to propose a pediatric version of the ENDA classification.

Methods

Patients included

We conducted a historical-prospective study including all patients evaluated at the allergy
unit of the University Hospital of Montpellier (France) for a clinical history of possible
NSAIDs HS, which occurred during the pediatric age, from September 1996 to July 2015,
and who underwent an oral DPT. Following the diagnostic work-up recommendations for
NSAIDs HS (8), we classified patients on the basis of the clinical reaction reported and the
one recorded at the time of the DPT; the different chemical classes of NSAIDs involved in
their reaction; the presence of an underlying chronic disease (asthma, chronic urticaria,
chronic rhinosinusitis, atopy as defined by the presence of at least one positive skin prick test
to the common aeroallergens of Montpellier area); the delay of reaction; and the suspected

HS mechanism.

Clinical data were collected through the validated ENDA drug allergy questionnaire (9).
DPTs were performed under strict hospital surveillance at least four weeks after the last
patient’s HS reaction, according to the unit's protocol (5, 10). Patients had not been taking
any H1-antihistamines or other drug possibly affecting the results of the test. Patients on Bblockers were asked to visit their specialist to stop the drug 2 days prior to the test.

Administration was single-blinded and performed on the ward by a physician with full

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
resuscitation back up. In case of a possible positive DPT, another molecule would be tested to
find a safe alternative for the patient, at least 4 to 6 weeks after the previous DPT. All data
were collected in the Drug Allergy and Hypersensitivity Database (DAHD®) using FileMaker

Pro 13 software.

We excluded all patients who had experienced severe life-threatening skin reactions (toxic
epidermal necrolysis and Stevens Johnson syndrome), drug-induced autoimmune diseases or
severe organ involvements (such as cytopenias, hepatitis, DRESS-Drug Reaction with
Eosinophilia and Systemic Symptoms), since DPTs are contra-indicated for such reactions.
All patients refusing DPTs were excluded as well. Written consent was obtained before the

test after informing the patients and the parents of children.

Clinical data

For each patient, we looked for the following possible clinical entities, occurring both at the
time of the reaction and of the DPT: urticaria, angioedema (AO), maculopapular eruption,
fixed drug eruption, rhinitis, conjunctivitis, bronchospasm (defined by dyspnea associated
with cough and/or wheezing and/or a fall of 20% of the patient’s basal FEV1 value), ENTrelated dyspnea, psychogenic dyspnea (diagnosis per exclusionem), gastrointestinal signs,
anaphylaxis. Anaphylaxis was defined as a rapid allergic response involving two different
organs with or without associated hypotension (11). Laryngeal angioedema associated

dyspnea was considered as a muco-cutaneous symptom.
We tested children with the culprit drug and, in case of a positive DPT, patients were tested,
at least 4 weeks after the previous DPT, with a different NSAID, belonging to another

chemical subgroup. All together, 14 different NSAIDs have been tested, belonging to

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
different chemical subgroups: acetylsalicylic acid, celocoxib, diclofenac, etoricoxib,

ibuprofen, ketoprofen, meloxicam, metamizole, niflumic acid, nimesulide, piroxicam,

trofecoxib, tiaprofenic acid. Paracetamol/acetaminophen was included as well in the list of

the 14 tested drugs.

Patients’ classification

In order to evaluate the accuracy of the ENDA classification (Table 1) in our pediatric cohort,

we tried to attribute each patient to the different ENDA groups, numbered from | to 5:

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

NSAIDs-exacerbated respiratory disease
NSAIDs-exacerbated cutaneous disease

NSAIDs-induced urticaria/angioedema
Single-NSAID-induced urticaria/angioedema or anaphylaxis

Single-NSAID-induced delayed reactions

Whenever a phenotype did not strictly correspond to one of the 5 groups, the patient was

classified as “divergent” according to the following criteria:

the patient was included in the group that seemed the closest to his phenotype;

we used a letter to highlight for which feature of the group the patient did not properly
fit in the ENDA classification: A — clinical manifestations; B — delay of the reaction;
C — underlying disease; D — cross-reactivity (for example, an asthmatic patient who
developed urticaria to several NSAIDs was classified as 3C);

a patient divergent for more than one feature of the group was considered as “not

possible to classify”.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Statistical analysis

Categorical data were expressed in frequencies and percent, continuous data in median and
quartiles. To evaluate possible risk factors, we analyzed crude and adjusted odds ration, with
a 95% confidence interval. A multivariate analysis was conducted using a logistic regression
model to determine independent risk factors of NSAIDs, in which we included all variables
associated with a p value below 0.20 in the univariate analysis. Then, a stepwise procedure
allowed obtaining the final multivariate model. We considered as statistically significant a p
value < 0.05.

Results

Patients’ characteristics, DPT and symptoms

635 patients fulfilled our inclusion criteria. In 107 out of 635 (16.9%) a reaction was recorded
through the DPT, and a diagnosis of NSAIDs HS was reached. 62 out of 107 patients were
female (57.9%). The characteristics of the age distribution of our patients are shown in Table

2.

In the group of the 107 diagnosed patients, 77 (72.0%) were atopic and 47 (43.9%) were
sensitized to house dust mites. We are missing these data in 8 patients, that were therefore
considered as non-atopic nor sensitized to mites. Also, 19 patients (17.8%) suffered from
chronic urticaria, 45 (42.1%) reported symptoms of allergic rhino-conjunctivitis, and 37
(34.6%) were asthmatic. Two of the asthmatic patients, who were nevertheless adults at the
time of their first DPT, presented with nasal polyposis as well. Other allergic diseases
included atopic dermatitis (7 patients, 6.5%), food allergy (6 patients, 5.6%), chronic rhinosinusitis (2 patients, 1.9%), other drug allergies (2 patients, 1.9%), and hymenoptera venom

allergy (1 patient, 0.9%).

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
On a multivariate analysis, four risk factors were highlighted for NSAIDs HS: urticaria
(adjusted OR 7.737, 3.375-18.296, 95%CI, p-value <0.001), atopy (adjusted OR 2.514,
1.504-4.364 95%CI, p-value <0.001), allergic rhino-conjunctivitis (adjusted OR 1.799, 1.1382.837 95%CI, p-value 0.011), and the age at the first reaction (adjusted OR 1.083, 1.033
1.137 95%CI, p-value <0.001).

In the group of the 107 patients, we ran a total of 192 DPT: 46 patients (43.0%) only took
one, and they did not come back to find a safe alternative, 44 (41.1%) underwent 2 DPT, 12
patients (11.2%) were tested for 3 different molecules, 3 (2.8%) for 4, and 2 patients (1.9%)

came back 5 times to be tested.

Overall clinical symptoms presented by patients during their reported reaction and during
DPT were: urticaria/angioedema (104 patients, 97.2%), bronchospasm (33 patients, 30.8%),
conjunctivitis (31 patients, 29.0%), anaphylaxis (27 patients, 25.2%), ENT-related dyspnea
(27 patients, 25.2%), maculopapular eruption (11 patients, 10.3%), rhinitis (8 patients, 7.5%),

and gastro-intestinal symptoms (1 patient, 0.9%).

Classification of hypersensitive patients, according to the ENDA classification

Among the 107 patients with NSAIDs HS, 43 patients (40.2%) could not be completely
classified in the current ENDA classification and were divergent for one criterion, while 4
patients (3.7%) were considered as “not possible to classify” (divergent for more than one

criterion), as shown in Table 3.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Patients were divergent mainly for the feature A, “clinical manifestation” and C, “underlying
disease”. No patient was divergent for the feature B, “delay of reaction”. No patient strictly
corresponded to the group 1, “NSAIDs-exacerbated respiratory disease” of the ENDA

classification (Table 3).

Among the 22 patients belonging to the group 4, ‘“single-NSAID-induced
urticaria/angioedema or anaphylaxis”, the main culprit drugs were
paracetamol/acetaminophen (7 patients, 31.8% of the group) and ibuprofene (7 patients,
31.8% of the group). All these patients had a negative DPT to at least one other NSAID. The

rest of the results are shown in Table 3.

New possible pediatric classification

On the basis of our results, we proposed a new classification in three groups, strictly derived
from the ENDA one. This classification remains focused on the pathophysiologic HS
mechanism, but we also included, as a feature, the impact of risk factors (urticarial, atopy,
allergic rhino-conjunctivitis, and age at first reaction). We excluded the presence of
underlying diseases (which could occur later in life), and modified the possible clinical

manifestations (Table 4).

In this new classification, all our patients could be classified and no patient was divergent.
We included 91 patients (85.1%) in the group I, “non-allergic NSAIDs hypersensitivity”, 15
patients (14.0%) in the group II, “single NSAID-induced urticarial/angioedema/anaphylaxis”,
and | patient (0.9%) in the group III, “single NSAID-induced delayed reactions”. The group I
contains actually groups | through 3 of the ENDA classification, and it has to be considered

as a transitory group, since patients may develop underlying chronic diseases throughout age.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Even though a recent paper did not highlight a correlation between NSAID-induced urticaria
and evolution toward chronic urticaria (12), these data refer to adult patients over a 12-years
follow-up, and might differ from what we might record in a strictly pediatric population.
Therefore, so far, the evolution of the immune system and the possible appearance of chronic

diseases seem not to allow, in children, a differentiation between the first 3 ENDA groups.

Discussion

Drug hypersensitivity is acquiring more and more importance in patients’ everyday life. The
EAACT and the ENDA group in particular have proposed several protocols and tools to guide
allergists to perform a correct diagnosis and a complete allergy work-up in patients presenting
with a suspected hypersensitivity reaction to drugs. As for NSAIDs, a classification has been
proposed in 2013, but it focused on adult populations. The fact that it is now clear that
NSAIDs HS is a key issue in the pediatric population as well, made it imperative to evaluate

the appropriateness of such a classification in this group of patients.

To our knowledge, we described the largest pediatric cohort with a diagnosis of NSAIDs
hypersensitivity. The first aspect highlighted by our results is that the ENDA classification
did not allow us to classify more than 40% of the patients, and it seems therefore clear that

the current recommendations are not suitable for the pediatric population.

According to a recent pediatric study by Cavkaytar et al. (13), who analyzed a cohort of 30
NSAIDs hypersensitive patients, phenotypes are different in children and adults and pediatric
subjects cannot completely be classified in the latest classifications (5, 6). In the same study,
27% of patients were diagnosed as NSAID hypersensitive and only one patient was classified

in the group “NSAIDs-exacerbated respiratory disease” of ENDA classification (13). Our

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
results are similar to those highlighted by Cavkaytar et al: in fact, the main problem we found
in our cohort was related to the first group proposed by ENDA, “NSAIDs-exacerbated
respiratory disease”, since none of our patients could perfectly fit in this group. Indeed, this
group was initially created for adults suffering from late onset asthma, which is frequently
associated with chronic rhino-sinusitis and nasal polyposis and with a possible progression
towards severe asthma (recurrent respiratory exacerbations and corticosteroid-dependence)

(14, 15).

Considering that NSAIDs HS, and drug HS in general, tends to persist over the years, we
could speculate that the evolution of children’s immune system and the possible appearance
of new and persistent underlying diseases make it difficult to include patients in this group,
even though the same patients may belong to it once grown. Nevertheless, in a pediatric
classification, it seems inappropriate to classify children according to their underlying

disease.

An interesting aspect of our results is that most of our patients (97.2%) reacted to NSAIDs
presenting urticaria and/or angioedema as a symptom. Therefore, mucocutaneous symptoms
are not specific during the pediatric age and not sufficient to differentiate and classify
patients. Also, only very few patients (1.9%) presented isolated bronchospasm as a symptom,

and such a result is confirmed by other authors (2, 16).

In the literature, physical exercise is often considered as a risk factor to develop an HS
reaction to NSAIDs; also, NSAIDs are known as a potential trigger for developing food
allergy reactions (1). However, recent NSAIDs HS classification did not include these risk

factors. We did not find a correlation between food allergy and NSAIDs HS, and we did not

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
have patients who presented a pediatric clinical history in which physical exercise was related
to the appearance of HS symptoms after NSAID intake (data not shown). In the literature, a
significant association has been found between house dust mites’ sensitization and NASIDs
hypersensitivity (14). In our study, atopy (but not particularly house dust mites sensitization),
urticaria, allergic rhino-conjunctivitis, and an early reaction in life were found as significant

risk factors for hypersensitivity reactions to NSAIDs.

Taking into account all of these considerations, we proposed a new classification for NSAIDs
HS in children, in which we included the presence of the previously mentioned risk factors,
and we neglected the presence of possible underlying chronic diseases. This classification
could actually be a helpful tool to understand the mechanisms leading to the HS reaction and

to guide allergists in their work-up.

A limitation of this study was that we didn't perform any skin test for the patients who
presented anaphylactic reaction or reaction to a single NSAID in their clinical history. Such
data could help proving the possible IgE mediated mechanism. Nevertheless, skin tests are
not standardized nor validated in clinical practice for NSAIDs and, more importantly, we
preferred to use DPT as the gold standard to reach a diagnose of hypersensitivity reaction.
Also, we did not test many patients with aspirin. This is due to the fact that such a drug is
rarely prescribed in children, due to the risk of Reye’s syndrome, and, therefore, a clinical
approach to NSAIDs hypersensitivity in children cannot focus on such molecule, which, on
the other hand, is often administered in the adult population. Another possible limitation of
the present study concerns the diagnosis of rhino-sinusitis and nasal polyposis. Indeed, these
diagnoses are mostly done in adult patients and require endoscopic and/or imaging

techniques. Therefore, we could not exclude an underestimation of these diseases, even

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
though, at least for nasal polyposis, such a diagnosis is rare during childhood and generally

related to other diseases.

In conclusion, during childhood every child is exposed at least once to a NSAID, and there

are no alternative, on a routine base, to treat fever and/or pain. An accurate classification of

NSAIDs hypersensitive patients could help better understand the pathology of these reactions

and guide the management of these patients since their early age. We believe that our study

could help allergists better understand the differences between adults and children in

developing HS reactions to NSAIDs and could indicate a possible way to modify the present

classification.

Bibliography

1.

Blanca-Lopez,N, Cornejo-Garcia JA, Plaza-Serén MC et al. Hypersensitivity to
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in children and adolescents: cross-Intolerance
reactions. J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol 2015: 25: 259-69.

Liew WK, Chiang WC, Goh AE. Paediatric anaphylaxis in a Singaporean children
cohort: changing food allergy triggers over time. Asia Pac Allergy 2013: 3: 29-34.
Stevenson DD, Sanchez-Borges M, Szczeklik A. Classification of allergic and
pseudoallergic reactions to drugs that inhibit cyclooxygenase enzymes. Ann Allergy
Asthma Immunol 2001: 87: 177-80.

Quiralte J, Blanco C, Delgado J et al. Challenge-based clinical patterns of 223
Spanish patients with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory-drug-induced-reactions. J

Investig Allergol Clin Immunol 2007: 17: 182-8.

. Kowalski ML, Asero R, Bavbek S et al. Classification and practical approach to the

diagnosis and management of hypersensitivity to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
drugs. Allergy 2013: 68: 1219-32.

6. Caimmi S, Caimmi D, Bousquet PJ, Demoly P. How can we better classify NSAID
hypersensitivity reactions? — Validation from a large database. Int Arch Allergy
Immunol 2012: 159: 306-12.

7. Ameratunga R, Randall N, Dalziel S, Anderson BJ. Samter's triad in childhood: a
warning for those prescribing NSAIDs. Pediatr Anesth 2013: 23: 757-9.

8. Kowalski, M. L. and J. S. Makowska. Seven steps to the diagnosis of NSAIDs
hypersensitivity: how to apply a new classification in real practice? Allergy Asthma
Immunol Res 2015: 7: 312-20.

9. Demoly P, Kropf R, Bircher A, Pichler WJ. Drug hypersensitivity: questionnaire.
Allergy 1999: 54: 999-1003.

10. Messaad D, Sahla H, Benahmed S, Godard P, Bousquet J, Demoly P. Drug
provocation tests in patients with a history suggesting an immediate drug
hypersensitivity reaction. Ann Intern Med 2004: 140: 1001-6.

1

any

. Sampson HA, Mujfioz-Furlong A, Campbell RL. Second symposium on the definition
and management of anaphylaxis: summary report-Second National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Disease/Food Allergy and Anaphylaxis Network symposium. J
Allergy Clin Immunol 2006: 117: 391-7.

12. Dofia I, Blanca-Lépez N, Torres MJ et al. NSAID-induced urticaria/angioedema does

not evolve into chronic urticaria: a 12-year follow-up study. Allergy 2014: 69: 438-44.

13. Cavkaytar O, Arik Yilmaz E, Karaatmaca et al. Different Phenotypes of Non-Steroidal

Anti-Inflammatory Drug Hypersensitivity during Childhood. Int Arch Allergy
Immunol 2015: 167: 211-21.
14. Ayuso P, Blanca-Lépez N, Dojfia I et al. Advanced phenotyping in hypersensitivity

drug reactions to NSAIDs. Clin Exp Allergy 2013: 43: 1097-109.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
15. Berges-Gimeno MP, Simon RA, Stevenson DD. The natural history and clinical
characteristics of aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease. Ann Allergy Asthma
Immunol 2002: 89: 474-8.

16. Zambonino MA, Torres MJ, Mufioz C et al. Drug provocation tests in the diagnosis of
hypersensitivity reactions to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in children.

Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2013: 24: 151-9.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Table 1 — The ENDA classification adapted from [5], for the analysis of our cohort.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

delayed reactions

 

eruption, SJS/TEN, nephritis)

 

hours after exposure)

 

chronic diseases

 

A B C D
Group Type of reaction Clinical manifestation Delay of reaction Underlying disease a
number reactivity
Bronchial obstruction, dyspnea Acute (usually
1 NSAIDs-exacerbated and/or nasal immediate to several | Asthma/rhinosinusitis Yes
respiratory disease i 3
congestion/rhinorrhea hours after exposure)
Acute (usually
2 NBAIDs-exacerbated Urticaria and/or angioedema immediate to several | Chronic urticaria Yes
cutaneous disease
hours after exposure)
* Acute (usually :
3 NSAIDs vinduced Urticaria and/or angioedema immediate to several No underlying Yes
urticaria/angioedema chronic diseases
hours after exposure)
Single-NSAID-induced Acute (usually No waden¥in
4 urticaria/angioedema or Urticaria/angioedema/anaphylaxis | immediate to several won ying No
chronic diseases
anaphylaxis hours after exposure)
f A Various symptoms and organs Delayed onset .
5 Single-NSAID-induced involved (e.g., fixed drug (usually more than 24 Na indent ying No

Legend: NSAIDs — Non Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs; SJS — Steven Johnson Syndrome; TEN — toxic epidermal necrolysis

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

 
Table 2 — Age distribution in our cohort.

 

 

 

 

Median age (25°- Overall population Hypersensitive
75°) (N = 635) patients (N = 107)

At the time of the
first reaction (years) 9 (2-13) IL@y-ld5)
At the time of the
first DPT (years) 15 (10-24) 15 (11-22.5)
Delay between the
first reaction and the 3 (1-15) 2 (0-13)

first DPT (years)

 

 

 

Legend: DPT — Drug Provocation Test

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Table 3 — Distribution of our patients according to the ENDA classification, and criteria for which our patients resulted divergent.

Divergent patients, N (%)

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

B Cc
Patients Patients
Group Gung included in the completely Clinical Delay of Underlying Crossnumber oup, N (%) belonging to the | manifestation | reaction disease reactivity
BrouPy NW? | group, N (%)
1 i respiratory 14 (13.1%) 0 (0.0%) 11(10.3%) | 0(0.0%) | 1(0.9%) | 2(1.9%)
2 ee ni cutaneous 17 (15.9%) 12 (11.2%) 10.9%) | 0@.0%) | 210.9%) | 2.9%)
NSAIDs-induced
3 siilSearita ain boa 49 (45.8%) 35 (32.7%) 2 (1.9%) 0(0.0%) | 8(7.5%) | 4(3.7%)
Single-NSAID-induced
4 urtiearia/angioedema or anaphylaxis | _ 22 (20-6%) 16 (15.0%) 1 (0.9%) 0(0.0%) | 5(4.7%) | 0 (0.0%)
5 Bingle-hip Ai Demaguced ictayed 1 (0.9%) 1 (0.9%) 0 (0.0%) 00.0%) | 0(0.0%) | 0 (0.0%)
reactions
Not possible to classify 4 (3.7%)

 

 

Legend: NSAIDs — Non Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Table 4 — New possible classification for NSAIDs hypersensitivity in the pediatric population, adapted from the current ENDA classification.

 

 

 

 

 

A B Cc D
Goi Type of reaction Clinical manifestation Delay of reaction Impact of risk Cros s Putative
number factors reactivity mechanism
Urticaria, angioedema,
I Non-allergic NSAIDs dyspnea, rhinitis, Acute (usually immediate to Stron Yes COXx-1
hypersensitivity (ENDA 1,2,3) | conjunctivitis, several hours after exposure) 8 : inhibition
anaphylaxis
Singie NS AID=induced Urticaria, angioedema, . IgEIl urticaria/angioedema or anaphylaxis Immediate (< | hour) Unknown No diated
anaphylaxis (ENDA 4) phylaxis mediate
Various symptoms and
Single-NSAID-induced organs involved (e.g., Delayed onset (usually more Unkn N T-cells
Ii delayed reactions (ENDA 5) fixed drug eruption, than 24 h after exposure) HSnOWE 9 mediated

 

 

 

Legend

 

SJS/TEN, nephritis)

 

 

 

 

 

: NSAIDs — Non Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs; COX-1 — Cyclooxygenase 1; SJS — Steven Johnson Syndrome; TEN — toxic epidermal necrolysis.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
