Dermatologic and ocular diseases

Mechanisms of autoimmune activation
of basophils in chronic urticaria

 

Yoko Kikuchi, DVM, MPVM, and Allen P. Kaplan, MD Charleston, SC

Background: Approximately 35% to 40% of patients with
chronic urticaria possess a circulating antibody directed to the
o subunit of the high-affinity type I IgE receptor (FceRI),
which is detectable by using histamine release assays or
immunoblotting. Prior reports suggest that purified IgG may
not directly activate basophils but rather does so through complement activation.

Objective: We sought to further elucidate the mechanism by
which this antibody causes basophil histamine release, including the role of complement, and to reassess the relationship of
functional versus binding assays.

Methods: We incubated human basophils with patient serum,
patient IgG, or patient IgG plus normal serum as a complement source and measured histamine release for each condition. IgG fractions were neutralized with cloned © subunit to
determine whether histamine release decreased proportionately. We also screened sera from 260 patients to compare histamine release with immunoblotting results.

Results: We initially tested 35 sera from patients with chronic
urticaria by using basophils from 2 atopic donors and one
nonreleaser with rabbit anti-IgE. No histamine was released
from the nonreleaser, yet all donors responded identically to
monocyte chemotactic protein 1, indicating a requirement for
IgE or the IgE receptor. Basophil histamine release was
markedly augmented by complement if release by IgG alone
was low. Incubation of purified IgG with an increasing concentration of cloned © subunit gradually reduced the histaminereleasing capability in patients with positive or negative
immunoblot results. Of 260 patients tested, 43% had positive
histamine release results, and 47% had positive immunoblot
results, yet there was no correlation when individual patients
were assessed.

Conclusion: A subpopulation of patients with chronic urticaria
possess IgG antibody directed to the o subunit of FceRI. This
IgG activates basophils, which is dependent on or augmented
by complement. Binding assays for the FceRI « subunit, such
as immunoblotting, are not currently feasible as a screening
method. A functional assay is required. (J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2001;107:1056-62.)

From the Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care,
Allergy and Clinical Immunology, and the Konishi-MUSC Institute for
Inflammation Research, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston.

Received for publication December 15, 2000; revised February 21, 2001;
accepted for publication February 27, 2001.

Reprint requests: Allen P. Kaplan, MD, Medical University of South Carolina, Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary/Allergy, 96 Jonathan
Lucas St, PO Box 250623, Charleston, SC 29425

Copyright © 2001 by Mosby, Inc.

0091-6749/2001 $35.00 +0 1/85/115484

doi: 10.1067/mai.2001.115484

1056

 

Key words: Chronic urticaria, basophils, histamine release, complement, IgE receptor, & subunit, immunoblot

Chronic urticaria is a common skin disorder characterized by recurrent, transitory, pruritic, and erythematous wheals present for at least 6 weeks. Patients need
not be atopic, and as a group they do not have an
increased incidence of atopic dermatitis, allergic rhinitis,
or asthma compared with the incidence of these disorders
in the population at large. If patients with physically
induced hives are excluded, the incidence of identifying
an external allergen that is responsible for hive formation
is less than 5%.!

A subpopulation of patients with chronic urticaria
appears to have an autoimmune disorder, and there is
association of urticaria with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis.23
The incidence of thyroid autoantibodies in patients with
chronic urticaria is approximately 24%, and 19% of
patients have biochemical evidence of thyroid dysfunction (ie, either hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism).*
Gruber et al first reported the existence of IgG or IgM
anti-IgE in the serum of patients with chronic urticaria.
These autoantibodies can be incubated with basophils to
release histamine and are present in 5% to 10% of
patients.>-° Hide et al’ and workers in other laboratories®-!3
reported that 30% to 40% of serum from patients with
chronic urticaria have an IgG antibody to the IgE receptor. A substantial fraction of patients (about 60%) do not
have these autoantibodies measured with binding methods nor are their sera positive for histamine release.

Antireceptor antibody is demonstrable by means of
degranulation of human basophils7-8!0!2. or mast
cells?!3 or immunoblotting with the cloned a subunit.8:!0.1! Prior reports have suggested that the purified
IgG may not directly activate these cells but rather does
so through complement activation, with C5a as the likely agonist.!2.!3 In this report we further analyze the
mechanism by which antireceptor antibody causes
basophil histamine release by using patient sera, purified
patient IgG, patient IgG plus a serum source of normal
complement, and absorption of IgG, sera, or both with
cloned @ subunit. We also determined the percentage of
positive sera as assessed by means of histamine release
from basophils compared with immunoblotting results.
Our data demonstrate the ability of patient IgG to directly activate basophils through interaction with the a subunit of the IgE receptor. The percentage of histamine
release is augmented by complement, which varies from
patient to patient, but can be substantial. Finally, we

 

 

 

 
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
VOLUME 107, NUMBER 6

 

Abbreviations used
FceRI: High-affinity type I IgE receptor
MCP-1: Monocyte chemotactic protein 1

 

demonstrate that immunoblotting is associated with
false-positive and false-negative results and at present
cannot be used reliably as a screening method; a functional assay is required.

METHODS
Patients and control subjects

‘We selected 260 sera (from 1997-2000) from patients with recurrent hives of greater than 12 weeks’ duration occurring at least 4
times a week, with individual lesions lasting over 4 hours. Patients
with physically induced urticaria or clinical evidence of urticarial
vasculitis were excluded. Antihistamine treatment was stopped at
least 48 hours before serum samples were collected, and none of the
patients were taking tricyclic antidepressants, corticosteroids, or
immunosuppressive drugs at the time of venipuncture or in the
recent past. Sera from normal subjects served as controls.

Leukocyte isolation

Fifteen milliliters of whole blood was mixed with 1.5 mL of 0.2
mol/L EDTA 10% and with 3.0 mL of 3% dextran-3% glucose-0.15
mol/L NaCl saline solution. The mixture was sedimented for 90
minutes, the supernatant was removed, and the cells were placed
into 50-mL conical tubes and washed 3 times with HBSS-HSA containing HBSS (Gibco BRL), 4 mmol/L HEPES, and 0.3% human
serum albumin. The cells were then resuspended in HBBS-HAS
containing 2 mmol/L CaCl, and 1 mmol/L MgCl). This leukocyte
concentration was brought back to the original concentration.

Purification of IgG

IgG was isolated by means of protein G (Pharmacia Biotech)
affinity chromatography according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Depletion of a myeloma IgE sample (2000 ng/mL) was used
to establish the IgE-binding capacity of the anti-IgE column. The
flow-through was also collected. Eluates containing IgG were run
through an anti-IgE affinity column to deplete IgE. Immunoaffinity-purified, polyclonal goat anti-human IgE (Chemicon International) was immobilized on Sepharose (UltraLink, Biosupport Medium,
Pierce) according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. The purified
IgG fractions were concentrated back to their original serum volume by using a centrifugal filter device (Centricon and Centriprep,
Millipore). The purity of IgG in the final solution was confirmed by
separating the proteins on SDS-PAGE and staining the gel with silver stain. No other protein was detected. Western blotting was done
to confirm that the final solution does not contain IgM. The IgG
concentration in whole serum and IgG fractions were measured by
using the Bradford method.

Histamine release from basophils and
histamine assay

Three healthy blood donors whose cells were reactive with antiIgE antibody and responsive to many of the patient sera were chosen for studies reported here. These donors (donors 1, 2, and 3) were
atopic, with serum IgE levels of 162 IU/mL, 88 IU/mL, and 25
IU/mL, respectively. One nonatopic donor (donor 4), whose
basophils did not respond to anti-IgE, was used as a control, and her
serum IgE level was 10 TU/mL.

Kikuchi and Kaplan 1057

Seventy-five microliters of serum, buffer, purified IgG, or other
agonist (eg, monocyte chemotactic protein 1 [MCP-1]) was incubated with 75 wL of leukocyte suspension for 40 minutes at 37°C.
After incubation, the supernatants were separated by centrifugation
at 3000g¢ for 5 minutes at 4°C, and histamine release was determined. Two replicate aliquots of cells were boiled to determine total
basophil histamine content.

Histamine release was measured with an enzyme immunoassay
(Immunotech International), according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. All histamine release experiments were done in duplicate, and the results are expressed as a percentage of total histamine
content. Spontaneous histamine release from the cells was less than
8% of total histamine.

 

Immunoblotting

Purified soluble recombinant © subunit of the high-affinity type I
IgE receptor (FceRIq; a gift from Dr Donald L. Wassom, Heska Corporation, Fort Collins, Colo) was subjected to electrophoresis on 10%
SDS gels and transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes (Costar Scientific Corp), which were then blocked with 3% dry milk in PBS for
1 hour. Membranes were reacted with serum diluted 1:500 and developed with a goat anti-human IgG (Fe fragment-specific) alkaline
phosphatase conjugate (1:5000; Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories Inc). Antibody binding was visualized by incubation of the membrane with a phosphatase substrate, 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl
phosphate/nitroblue tetrazolium (Kirkegraard & Perry Laboratories).

 

Statistical analysis

Descriptive data in Table I were analyzed by using Epi Info version 6.03 software. Frequency distributions were obtained, and the
x2 test for homogeneity for 2 x 2 contingency tables was used to test
for the statistical significance of association.

RESULTS

Histamine release induced by sera from
patients with chronic urticaria with
basophils from 2 atopic donors and one
nonatopic donor

Basophils obtained from 2 atopic donors (donors 1
and 2) and one nonatopic donor (donor 4) were incubated with 35 sera from patients with chronic urticaria, and
the histamine release was determined (Fig 1, A). These 3
donors’ basophils were stimulated with rabbit anti-IgE (1
tig/mL), and the percentage of histamine release was
found to be 99%, 46%, and 6%, respectively. Values
above 16.9% histamine release were taken as elevated.!!
Twenty-four (69%) and 23 (66%) sera were determined
to be positive by using basophils from donor 1 and donor
2, respectively. Donor 2 generally released a lesser percentage of histamine from each serum compared with
donor 1. Donor 4 is the normal nonatopic subject, and
most sera tested were not able to release histamine from
her basophils (6% were weakly positive).

Histamine release from donor basophils with
MCP-1

The basophils of each of these 3 donors were stimulated with increasing concentration of MCP-1. As shown
in Fig 1, B, the basophils of donor 4 were no less responsive than those of donors | and 2. Thus donor 4 is a nonresponder to stimuli that act through IgE, the IgE recep1058 Kikuchi and Kaplan

J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
JUNE 2001

TABLE I. Statistical analysis on histamine release activity and result of immunoblotting on sera from patients with

chronic urticaria (n = 260 patients: 1997-2000)

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Positive histamine release (>15%) Negative histamine release (<15%) Total
Positive immunoblot result 52 70 122 (47%)
Negative immunoblot result 59 79 138 (53%)
Total 111 (43%) 149 (57%) 260
100 100
90 + + 637
iS so + 607
yy 80F Cea 597
% So 595
3 g 0 7 584
a 2 50 +572
& # 40+ + 570
£ 40 ‘2 tL 670
Sg 30
| 3 20 + © 667
i) 20 = 652
10 + te 632
aa a
0 Patients’ Serum. Purified IgG(from Patients’
A Donor 1 Donor 2 Donor 4 A Serum)
100
, 90 + + Normal |
50 = 80+ -# Normal 2
y 70+ —- Normal 3
a, + Donor | a
wot 3 60 + © Normal 4
rg -© Donor 2 = 50-7
g wb £ aot
cr -& Donor 4 al
4 Z 30
2 | = 50
& 2
= 10
a Sa
— 0 +
“2 107
lan} Normal Serum Purified IgG(from Normal
B Serum)
0 n L 1 1
FIG 2. Percentage of histamine release from donor 1's basophils
0 106 105 10.4 103 stimulated with 11 patient sera and purified IgG from patients (A)
“i and 4 sera and purified IgG from control subjects (B). Purified IgG
B Concentration of MCP-1(M) was concentrated back to its original serum level.

FIG 1. A, Variability in ability to release histamine from basophils
from 3 different donors (donor 1, donor 2, and donor 4). Basophils
were incubated with 35 sera from patients with chronic urticaria,
and percentage of histamine release was determined. B, Percentages of histamine release from basophils from 3 different donors
(donor 1, donor 2, and donor 4) stimulated with different concentrations of MCP-1 (10-6, 10-5, 10-4, and 10-3 mol/L) were determined.

tor, or both, with normal responsiveness to a G protein—linked receptor, such as CCR2. These data also suggested that the histamine-releasing factor within the sera
from patients with chronic urticaria act directly or indirectly by means of FceRI.

Basophil histamine release after stimulation
with sera from patients with urticaria and
purified IgG versus normal sera and purified
IgG

Because autoantibodies to the FceRI o subunit or occasionally to IgE itself have been found to be in the IgG fraction, we purified IgG from sera from 4 healthy subjects
and 11 patients with chronic urticaria; the patients’ sera all
released more than 20% histamine from the basophils of
donor 1. Histamine release with patients’ sera and their
purified IgG was then compared by using basophils of
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
VOLUME 107, NUMBER 6

donor 1 (Fig 2, A, for patients with chronic urticaria and
Fig 2, B, for control subjects). Purified IgG from some
patients was able to release histamine, whereas purified
IgG from normal control subjects was not. The release
obtained with the highest IgG concentration was proportional to the release obtained with whole serum; for example, those with the highest serum release had the best
release with IgG. However, purified IgG did not release
nearly as well as whole serum. Although not shown, when
we eluted the proteins bound to the affinity column, concentrated them back to their original serum concentration,
and tested them for histamine release, none of the patients
had positive results. Thus a non-IgG serum fraction with
histamine-releasing activity was not identified.

Effect of complement on basophil histamine
release

Control subjects’ and patients’ purified IgG (patients
No. 595 and 607 shown herein are representative) were
mixed with normal serum as a source of complement to
determine whether antibody against the o subunit from
patients’ IgG may create an immune complex and activate the complement system, and histamine release from
basophils was determined (Fig 3, A-C). For this study,
basophils from donor 3, which had a sensitivity similar to
those for donor 2 shown in Fig 1, A, were used. Purified
IgG was returned to its original concentration within the
patients’ serum. For patients 595 and 607, the IgG concentrations were 20 and 16 mg/mL, respectively, and the
IgG concentration of the normal control serum was 15
mg/mL. In Fig 3 the middle lines indicate the percentage
of histamine release observed with the purified IgG when
tested at various concentrations. The top lines indicate
the percentage of histamine release when IgG was added
to normal serum, and the bottom lines indicate the histamine release with different mixtures of buffer and normal
serum as a negative control. The contribution of serum
differed greatly depending on the source of the IgG.
Patient 595’s histamine release by IgG alone was
markedly augmented by the addition of normal serum
(Fig 3, A). The maximum increase was 195%. The
increase for patient 607 was much less, with a maximal
increment value of 41% (Fig 3, B). No release was
obtained with normal IgG with or without the addition of
normal serum (Fig 3, C). We studied 6 of our patients in
this fashion; the results for 2 patients resembled Fig 3, A,
with prominent complement dependence, and the results
of the other 4 resembled Fig 3, B, in which IgG alone was
able to cause significant histamine release.

Neutralization of autoantibodies to FceRla by
cloned o subunit

Pathogenic and normal purified IgG was preincubated
with increasing concentration of soluble cloned FceRla.
to demonstrate whether an interaction between the putative autoantibodies and FceRIo is requisite for histamine
release, and the histamine-releasing capability was determined. The basophil donor is atopic donor 3, as shown in
Fig 3. We purified IgG from 7 patients whose serum

Kikuchi and Kaplan 1059

aN
oOo

Histamine Release(%)
y Ww
Oo o

nt
ca}

 

 

A 0 2 40 60 80 100
Concentration of IgG (% of original concentration 20mg/mL)

Dn
Co

 

Release(%)
= aA
oO Oo

ine
we
md
T

His!
Ss 8
; 1

 

o

 

B 0 20 40 60 80 100
Concentration of IgG (% of original concentration 16mg/mL)

60

 

50

30

T

listamine Release(%)

oO
T

 

 

 

 

0 po
Cc 0 2 4 6 80 10

Concentration of IgG (% of original concentration 15 mg/mL)

FIG 3. Percentage of histamine release from human basophils
(donor 3) stimulated with patient IgG plus buffer (squares),
patient IgG plus normal serum (circles), or normal serum plus
buffer (triangles). Patient 595 (A) versus patient 607 (B) contrasts
IgG with limited ability to activate basophils with IgG that activates them well. There is a prominent augmentation of histamine
release with serum (circles) in A, where release with IgG is modest, whereas addition of serum yields only a small increment in
histamine release in B, where IgG alone releases well. A normal
control IgG is examined in C.
1060 Kikuchi and Kaplan

J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
JUNE 2001

 

 

 

 

 

70
—* Normal IgG

~ 60 —#- Buffer
sg ‘
x so b —e- Anti IgE
& 3+ 5951gG
a * —*- 6521gG
a 30 © 6671gG
5 —- 5841gG
Be 20F
Fy —s- 48219G

10 F —& 5831gG

3 z ——+—— —- 699I1gG
0.00 0.05 0.50 5.00 50.00

Concentration of soluble cloned FceRIa (ig/ml)

FIG 4. Concentration-dependent inhibition of histamine release from basophils (donor 3) by soluble cloned
FeeRlo. induced by IgG fractions from 7 patients with chronic urticaria. Numbers indicate patient identifiers.
Concentrations of purified IgG from patients 595, 652, 667, 584, 482, 583, and 699 are 20, 17, 7, 9, 11, 25, and
7 mg/mL, respectively. The concentration of purified IgG from the normal subject is 15 mg/mL. The con
centration of anti-IgE is 1 g/mL.

caused histamine release, regardless of whether the sera
had positive or negative immunoblot results. IgG from
patients number 595, 667, 482, 583, and 699 had positive
immunoblot results, and the others had negative results.
Anti-IgE and IgG from a normal subject were also preincubated with soluble cloned FceRIo as controls. The histamine-releasing activity of patient IgG was progressively diminished as a greater amount of soluble cloned
FceRIa was added (Fig 4), although histamine release
observed with anti-IgE (1 ug/mL) was not. Purified IgG
from patients with both positive and negative immunoblot
results were similarly inhibited by preincubation with soluble FceRIa, as assessed with basophil histamine release.

Correlation of basophil histamine release
with immunoblotting

Although many sera from patients with chronic
urticaria had negative results for anti-o. subunit antibodies, as determined by means of immunoblotting, some of
these sera, as well as the IgG isolated from them, were
able to induce histamine release from human basophils.
On the other hand, some sera that had positive results for
anti-@ subunit antibody by means of immunoblot were
not capable of inducing any measurable histamine
release from human basophils. When we assayed 260
patients for basophil histamine release versus
immunoblot analysis (Table I), the percentage with positive results was 43% and 47%, respectively, by using
basophils from donor | in Fig 1, A, which showed the
highest histamine release with patients’ serum and antiIgE. Within the group of patients with both positive and
negative histamine release results, the percentage of positive and negative immunoblot results was similar, with
values of 47% and 53%, respectively. Thus the results of
histamine release and immunoblotting did not correlate
when individual patients were assessed (P > .1).

 

DISCUSSION

Approximately 30% to 40% of patients with chronic
urticaria have demonstrable IgG autoantibodies directed to
the o& subunit of the IgE receptor, and an additional 5% to
10% have anti-IgE. Although the antibodies directly interact with the a subunit, the variability in the percentage of
positive sera from study to study is considerable, and the
consequences of binding to the © subunit are not clear. Initially, cross-linking of the @ subunit was assumed to lead
to cell activation and secretion. This was determined by
activation of rat basophil leukemia cells,7-!0 human
basophils,78:!!.!2 and cutaneous mast cells.9:!3 However,
additional studies reported that purified IgG from patient
sera were inactive on cutaneous mast cells!3 and human
basophils!2 and that a source of serum complement is
needed for activation to occur. Thus an anaphylatoxic
complement fragment, presumably C5a, was thought to
mediate the direct activation of basophils and mast cells. In
the study by Fiebiger et al,!2 the IgG subclasses present in
sera from patients with chronic urticaria appeared to be
predominantly IgG1 and IgG3, which readily fix complement. Positive immunoblot results but negative functional
assay results for basophil histamine release were observed
in autoimmune disorders, such as dermatomyositis and
pemphigus vulgaris. Those sera from patients who did not
have urticaria and in whom basophil histamine release
assay results were negative had a subclass predominance
of anti-o subunit consisting of IgG4, which does not fix
complement, or IgG2, which does so poorly.

The goals of this study were to further assess the variability among basophils donors, to seek evidence of
alternative basophil (and presumably mast cell) activation when the immunoblot result is negative but histamine release results are positive, and to reexamine the
role of complement.
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
VOLUME 107, NUMBER 6

Another issue we revisited was the possibility of a simple screening method for these autoantibodies. The original assay method was the autologous skin test, which was
performed with patient sera.° Although not addressed in
this article, large quantities of bradykinin are generated
when blood clots,!4 and C5 can be cleaved directly by
tryptase-like plasma proteases or elastase secreted by neutrophils without initiating the complement cascade.!5
Thus there is uncontrolled potential for injecting vasoactive substances or inducing mast cell activation that can
be interpreted as the presence of autoantibodies. Thus we
believed that immunoblot would be preferable, and a
large number of samples could be done at once. However, the presence of autoantibodies to the subunit, as
assessed with immunoblotting, was found to be unrelated
to histamine release, as reported by Horn et al.!© Because
it has been extremely difficult to convert this approach to
ELISA methodology, we reexamined their relationship.

Our results reemphasized the marked variability in
basophil response to patient sera depending on the donor.
Two atopic donors are compared with a nonatopic donor
in Fig 1, A and B, and a third atopic donor’s basophils are
used in Figs 3 and 4. We also noted that nonreleaser cells,
which are selectively unresponsive to cross-linking of
IgE or the IgE receptor, are unresponsive to sera from
patients with chronic urticaria and yet respond normally
to a cytokine, such as MCP-1. This has been shown to be
due to a functional abnormality in the tyrosine kinase
syk.!7.18 This provides further indication, albeit indirectly, that these sera act through IgE or the & subunit of the
IgE receptor. It has been shown that basophils from as
many as 10% to 20% of nonatopic donors fail to secrete
in response to cross-linking the  subunit.!9 Also,
basophils from nonreleasers may have low surface IgE
density and low FceRIa expression.2°

We then addressed the role of complement by isolating
patient IgG and tested the IgG at a range of concentrations
in the presence or absence of complement. IgG was able
to directly degranulate basophils, usually requiring a concentration approximating that of plasma, but this varied
greatly among patients. Some IgG fractions were minimally effective (either because of the particular patient or
lower IgG concentration used), and augmentation by a
source of complement was marked (Fig 3, A). When
prominent IgG-induced histamine release was observed,
the increment provided by additional complement was
small (Fig 3, B). Variables here would include not only the
intrinsic activity of patient IgG but also the IgG subclass
distribution and the percentage occupancy of subunits
with IgE. This is because the autoantibody appears to
react primarily with unoccupied receptors,!32! and crosslinking will depend on having appropriate geometry.

Finally, we compared the binding assay with a functional assay for detection of the antibody directed to the
a subunit of FceRI. As can be seen in Fig 4, we could
suppress histamine release by incubating isolated IgG
with soluble © subunit, as has been reported previously,’
even if the immunoblot results were negative. Therefore
we analyzed 260 sera and obtained no correlation of

Kikuchi and Kaplan 1061

immunoblotting versus histamine release when individual patients were compared, even though the overall percentage of positive results is strikingly similar as determined with the 2 methods; that is, the positive results in
each instance are not the same patients. The reason for
this discrepancy is not yet clear, but we suspect that falsepositive results may relate to the presence of IgG subclass 2 antibodies, IgG subclass 4 antibodies, or both or
to the presence of IgG directed to the carbohydrate
placed onto the cloned © subunit. The @ subunit is cloned
in baculovirus, and the glycosylation of the product differs from human glycosylation. False-negative results are
likely caused by insensitivity of the method, and conversion to an ELISA assay would increase sensitivity and
provide quantitation. Although cross-reaction of the a
subunit with tetanus toxoid was reported,!© we could not
absorb out the immunoblot bands with tetanus toxoid
(unpublished observations). We are now studying ways
to circumvent this issue, but meanwhile, we recommended functional assays to screen for the presence of these
autoantibodies. The autologous skin test can also be
used; however, one has to be aware of the aforementioned concerns regarding interpretation of this test (ie,
false-positive results), although it does appear to correlate with basophil histamine release.” A screening test by
using ELISA or blotting would be advantageous, but further research will be needed to devise a binding assay
that measures only the functional anti-c subunit. Finally,
it must be emphasized that about 60% of patient sera
have negative results in all assays and remain idiopathic.

REFERENCES

1. Kaplan AP. Urticaria and angioedema. In: Gallin JI, Snyderman R, editors. Inflammation: basic principles and clinical correlates. 3rd ed.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins; 1999. p. 915-28.
2. Leznoff A, Josse RG, Denberg J, Dolovich J. Association of chronic
urticaria and angioedema with thyroid autoimmunity. Arch Dermatol
1983;119:636-40.
3. Leznoff A, Sussman GL. Syndrome of idiopathic chronic urticaria and
angioedema with thyroid autoimmunity: a study of 90 patients. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 1989;84:66-71.
4. Kaplan AP, Finn A. Pathogenesis of chronic urticaria, Can J Allergy Clin
Immunol 1999;4:286-92.
5. Gruber BL, Baeza M, Marchese M, Agnella V, Kaplan AP. Prevalence
and functional role of anti-IgE autoantibodies in urticaria syndromes, J
Invest Dermatol 1988:90:213-7.
6. Grattan CEH, Francies DM, Hide M, Greaves MW. Detection of circulating histamine releasing autoantibodies with functional properties of
anti-IgE in chronic urticaria. Clin Exp Allergy 1992;21:695-704,
7. Hide M, Francis DM, Grattan CEH, Hakimi J, Kochan JP, Greaves MW.
Autoantibodies against the high affinity IgE receptor as a cause of histamine release in chronic urticaria. N Engl J Med 1993;328:1599-604.
8. Fiebiger E, Maurer D, Holub H, Reininger B, Hartmann G, Woisetschlager
M, et al. Serum IgG autoantibodies directed against the a chain of FceRI:
a selective marker and pathogenic factor for a distinct subset of chronic
urticaria patients. J Clin Invest 1995;96:2606-12.
9, Niimi N, Francis DM, Kermani F, Odonnell BF, Hide M, Kobzablack A,
et al. Dermal mast cell activation by antoantibodies against the high affinity IgE receptor in chronic urticaria. J Invest Dermatol 1996;106:1001-6.
10. Tong LJ, Balakrishnan G, Kochan JP, Kinet JP, Kaplan AP. Assessment
of autoimmunity in patients with chronic urticaria, J Allergy Clin
Immunol 1997;99:461-5.

. Ferrer M. Kinet JP, Kaplan AP. Comparative studies of functional and
binding assays for IgG anti-FceRIo. (o-subunit) in chronic urticaria. J
Allergy Clin Immunol 1998;101:672-6.
1062 Kikuchi and Kaplan

. Fiebiger E, Hammerschmid F, Sting] G, Maurer D. Anti-FceRIo. autoan
tibodies in autoimmune-mediated disorders: identification of a structurefunction relationship. J Clin Invest 1998;101:243-51.

. Ferrer M, Nakazawa K, Kaplan AP. Complement dependence of histamine

release in chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1999;104:169-72.

. Kaplan AP, Joseph K, Shibayama Y, Nakazawa Y, Ghebrehiwet B, Red
digari S, et al. Bradykinin formation: plasma and tissue pathways and
cellular interactions. In; Gallin JI, Snyderman R, editors. Inflammation:
basic principles and clinical correlates. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott
Williams and Wilkins; 1999. p. 331-47.

. Ward PA, Hill JH. C5 chemotactic fragments produced by an enzyme in

lysosomal granules of neutrophils. J Immunol 1970;104:535-43.

. Horn MP, Gerster T, Ochensberger B, Derer T, Kricek F, Jouvin MH, et

al. Human anti-Fe epsilon RI alpha autoantibodies isolated from healthy
donors cross-react with tetanus toxoid. Eur J Immunol 1999;29:1139-48.

 

. Kepley CL, Youssef L, Andrews RP, Wilson BS, Oliver JM. Syk deficien
cy in nonreleaser basophils. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1999;104:279-84.

 

20.

21.

Receive tables of contents by e-mail

To receive the tables of contents by e-mail, sign up through our Web site at
http://www.mosby.com/jaci
Choose E-mail Notification
Simply type your e-mail address in the box and click the Subscribe button
Alternatively, you may send an e-mail message to majordomo @ mosby.com.
Leave the subject line blank and type the following as the body of your message:
subscribe jaci_toc

You will receive an e-mail message confirming that you have been added to the mailing list.
Note that TOC e-mails will be sent out when a new issue is posted to the Web site.

J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
JUNE 2001

. Lavens-Phillips SE, MacGlashan DW. The tyrosine kinases p53/56 lyn

and p72syk are differentially expressed at the protein level but not at the
messenger RNA level in nonreleasing human basophils. Am J Respir Cell
Mol Biol 2000;23:566-71.

. Ishizaki T, Soto CS, Ishizaki K. Mechanisms of passive sensitization, II:

number of IgE molecules and their receptor sites on human basophil
granulocytes. J Immunol 1973;111:500-11.

Sarbjit SS, Klion AD, Holland SM, Hamilton RG, Bochner BS, MacGlashan DW. The relationship between serum IgE and surface levels of
FceR on human leukocytes in various diseases: correlation of expression
with FceRI on basophils but not on monocytes or eosinophils. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 2000;106:514-20.

Zweiman B, Valenzano M, Atkins PC, Tanus T, Getsy JA. Characteristics
of histamine-releasing activity in the sera of patients with chronic idiopathic urticaria, J Allergy Clin Immunol 1996;98:89-98.

 
