 

Serum Levels of Eosinophilderived Neurotoxin in Patients
with Chronic Urticaria

 

 

ABSTRACT

BACKGROUND: Despite the many theories that
have been published over the years, the exact
pathology of chronic urticaria (CU) is still largely
unknown. Eosinophils have been implicated

in many cutaneous disorders—serving as

major effector cells, inducing tissue damage

and dysfunction by releasing granule proteins,
including eosinophil cationic protein (ECP),
inflammatory lipid mediators, mitochondrial DNA,
and eosinophil-derived neurotoxin (EDN), which is
telatively neutral with some cytotoxic properties.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to evaluate serum levels of
EDN in patients with CU and to correlate their levels
with the severity of their disease. PARTICIPANTS:
Fifty patients with CU and 30 matching healthy
individuals, serving as controls, were recruited
from the outpatient clinic of the Dermatology,
Venereology, and Andrology Department of

Benha University Hospitals. METHODS: 5m of
venous blood were drawn from all participants

in a fasted state, stored in sterile tubes, and used
to measure the serum level of EDN following the
manufacturer's instructions. RESULTS: The serum
level of EDN was statistically significantly different
in both groups, and the serum level of EDN
significantly correlated with the severity of CU.
CONCLUSION: The significantly higher EDN

level in patients with CU suggests its role in the
pathogenesis of the disease, and its significant
positive correlation with the severity of the disease
suggests promising therapeutic solutions.

KEY WORDS: Chronic urticaria, eosinophil-derived
neurotoxin

 

 

 

by AHMED A. SALEH, MD; AIHAM M. AL-OBAIDI, MSc; EMAN G. BEHIRY, MD; and

AHMED MOHAMMED HAMED, MD

Mr. Al-Obaidi, Dr. Saleh, and Dr. Hamed are with the Department of Dermatology and Andrology of the Faculty of Medicine
at Benha University in Benha, Egypt. Dr. Behiry is with the Department of Clinical and Chemical Pathology of the Faculty of

Medicine at Benha University in Benha, Egypt.

J Gin Aesthet Dermatol. 2020;13(9):21—23

 

Chronic urticaria (CU) is characterized by the
persistence of spontaneously appearing skin
lesions, known as wheals, that are not associated
with angioedema, persist for six weeks or more,
and negatively affect a patient's quality of life.
Since the pathogenesis of CU is still unclear, its
treatment is empirical, with frustrating results.’

Immunoglobulin E (IgE) has been previously
identified as the main mediator of the
pathogenesis of CU, atopic dermatitis, asthma,
and allergic rhinitis. Additionally, mast cells and
basophils have been recognized as main effector
cells in CU. The current focus has been directed to
investigate the role of eosinophils in CU?

Eosinophils have been implicated in many
cutaneous disorders, as it is one of the major
perivascular inflammatory infiltrate and
extracellular granule proteins deposits (e.g.,
major basic protein, eosinophil cationic protein
[ECP], eosinophil peroxidase, and eosinophilderived neurotoxin [EDN]). The exact role of
eosinophils is still unclear, though some studies
have suggested that it contributes to pathogen
defense, inflammatory response regulation, and
fibrosis induction >*

The EDN, which is relatively neutral with
cytotoxic properties, is one of the major
secretory proteins present in the specific
granules of human eosinophils. Its release
is triggered by cytokines and other proinflammatory mediators, and is able to attract

other immune cells.°

The aim of this study was to evaluate serum
levels of EDN in patients with chronic urticaria
and to correlate their levels with the severity of
their disease.

METHODS

This case-control study included 50 patients
with CU recruited from the outpatient clinic of
the Dermatology, Venereology, and Andrology
Department of Benha University Hospitals
between October 2018 and January 2019.

Each participant signed a written informed
consent before joining the study. Patients were
excluded from the study if they had used topical
treatments within two weeks prior or systemic
treatments within one month prior to the
beginning of the study. Patients with a history of
any systemic disease or autoimmune disorders
(e.g. Lupus erythematous, thyroid disorders,
Helicobacter pylori, intestinal infections, atopy)
were also excluded from this study.

A detailed history was taken from each
patient to identify the cause of CU. All patients
were asked about disease duration, lesion
distribution, frequency of attacks, history
of food additives, occupation, and previous
therapeutic measures. Complete dermatological
examination was performed to identify the
morphology of the wheals, bruising, and signs of
any systemic disease.

 

FUNDING: No funding was provided for this study.

DISCLOSURES: The authors have no conflicts of interest relevant to the content of this article.
CORRESPONDENCE: Ahmed Mohamed Hamed; Email: ahmedhamed06@yahoo.com

JCAD
 

 

TABLE 1. Correlation between serum EDN levels and age
of patients, duration of disease and the severity by UAS

EDN (ng/mL)
P-VALUE
0.719

CORRELATIONS

0.874
<0.001*

UAS: Urticaria Activity score; EDN: eosinophil-derived
neurotoxin
* =Significant (p-value <0.05)

Following the recommendations of the
European Academy of Allergology and Clinical
Immunology; Global Allergy and Asthma
European Network; European Dermatology
Forum (EAACI/ GA2LEN/ EDF) activity score,
the Urticaria Activity Score (UAS) was used for
four consecutive days to determine disease
severity for each patient by calculating the sum
of the wheals score (0=absent lesions, =1—20
lesions, 2=20—50 lesions, and 3=more than 50
lesions in 24 hours) and the itching score (0=no
itching, 1=mild itching, 2=moderate itching,
and 3=severe itching). The score ranged from 0
to 6, where 0=no disease, 1-2=mild disease,
3—4=moderate disease, and 5—6=severe
disease.’

After determining disease severity for each
patient, 5ml of venous blood were drawn from
all participants, stored in sterile tubes and left
to clot; serum was then separated and stored
at -20°C until it was used to measure the serum
level of EDN following the manufacturer's

on | “

20 (if
100-Specificity

FIGURE 1. OC curve between patients with chronic urticaria and controls in regards to serum EDN levels

 

    

60 a0) 100

instructions. Serum EDN was measured using
Human (EDN) ELISA Kit (Sun Red Biotechnology;
Shanghai, China), with Cat. No.: 201-12-5363.
Statistical analysis. The 15th version
of SPSS software (Spss Inc; Chicago, Illinois)
was used for tabulation and organization of
the gathered data. Chi-square test (X2) or
Fisher's exact test (FET) were used to analyze
categorical data, presented as numbers and
percentages. Continuous data were presented
as meantstandard deviation, median, and
range. Variables with normal distribution
among two independent groups were evaluated
using the Student t test. Associations among
Nonparametric variables were detected by
Spearman's correlation coefficient (rho). The
cutoff value with the optimum sensitivity and
specificity was detected using the ROC curve.
Predictors were detected via performing a
regression analysis. A P-value of less than 0.05
was considered significant.

RESULTS

The present study included 50 patients
(26 male, 24 female) with CU with a duration
of disease ranging from 0.17 to 10 years
(Mean+SD=2.28+2.27 years). Thirty ageand sex-matched healthy subjects (16 male
and 14 female) served as a control group.
Patients were between 20 and 58 years of
age (Mean+SD=34.14+7.37 years), while
controls were between 18 and 47 years of age
(Mean+SD=31.14+8.31 years). Eleven patients

 

(22%) were smokers, while the control group
included six smokers (20%) with statistically
insignificant different demographic data among
both groups.

The most common precipitating factor of
CU, reported by 24 patients (48%), was food
additives, and the most common treatment
used by patients with CU was antihistamine and
corticosteroid, reported by 36 patients (72%).
Most patients (n=24) experienced mild disease
severity, indicated by weekly UAS evaluation,
while 16 patients experienced moderate disease
and 10 patients experienced severe disease.

The mean EDN serum levels were
significantly higher in patients with CU than
the control group (Mean+SD: 6.92+8.01ng/ml;
3.11£1.29ng/mL respectively, P= 0.012). There
was non-significant relation between serum
EDN levels and sex of patients, special habits,
precipitating factors, and previous treatment
(P= 0.535, P= 0.918, P= 0.510, and P=0.133,
respectively).

Ata cut-off value of >2.8ng/ml, serum EDN
had 70-percent sensitivity and 60-percent
specificity with the accuracy of 66.9 percent in
the diagnosis of CU (Figure 1).

Serum EDN levels were positively correlated
with the severity of the disease (r=0.951,
P<0.001), while there were non-significant
correlations with age and duration of disease
(P>0.05) (Table 1).

Applying regression analysis, we found that
the frequency of attacks, itching, and number of
wheals were significant predictors of elevated
EDN in patients with CU (Table 2).

DISCUSSION

CUis defined as a persistent or recurrent
disease of the skin in which an identified
trigger leads to the degranulation of mast cells.
In addition to IgE and antigen complexes, a
variety of IgE-independent stimuli, including
neuropeptides, complements, products of
infectious agents, and oxidative stress, can
activate mast cell degranulation and cytokine
production.* Eosinophils have been implicated
in many cutaneous disorders, being one of the
major perivascular inflammatory infiltrate and
extracellular granule proteins deposits (e.g.,
major basic protein, ECP, eosinophil peroxidase,
and EDN). *

In the current study, patients with CU
demonstrated a significantly higher mean
serum EDN level than healthy controls. To our
knowledge, the serum level of EDN in patients
with CU has not been previously studied.

Detecting urticarial lesions in patients
suffering from eosinophilic skin disorders,
such as hypereosinophilic syndrome or Wells
syndrome, as well as the elevation in the
number of eosinophils during the attacks of
angioedema suggest its involvement in the
pathogenesis of urticaria. Eosinophils express
several membrane receptors, making them
sensitive to a variety of molecules and also
lead to the release of various pro-inflammatory
mediators (e.g., cationic proteins and
leukotrienes) and also of immunoregulatory
mediators, confirming their roles in immunity
and inflammation.?"” Therefore, similar to
mast cells and basophils, eosinophils might be
activated by allergens through crosslinking of
cell-surface-bound IgE when an allergic cause of
chronic urticaria can be identified.’

The key role of eosinophils in sustaining
the inflammatory response is supported by
the presence of a perivascular infiltration,
predominantly of eosinophils, in the dermis
during the late-phase reaction observed in
particular forms of urticaria, such as CU. This
eosinophilic infiltration is associated with
infiltration of the cutaneous lesion by cationic
proteins (MBP and EDN) and high levels of
leukotrienes C4 and PAF-acether.""

Our results were in accordance with the
study by Lorenzo et al,’? who found that the
mean level of serum ECP (encoded by RNASE3
gene) closely related to the EDN (encoded by
the RNASE2 gene) was significantly higher in
patients with CU compared to healthy subjects.

Many studies have investigated the role
of eosinophils in the pathogenesis of other
allergic diseases that might be related to chronic
urticaria, such as atopic dermatitis (AD) and
asthma. Ina study by Kim et al," it was reported
that patients with severe AD had significantly
higher mean serum EDN levels compared to
patients with mild to moderate AD and healthy
controls. Moreover, Gon et al,"* also reported
that patients with asthma demonstrated
significantly higher mean serum EDN levels
than controls. These findings support the role
of eosinophils and their protein EDN in the
pathology of CU.

The current study showed a significant
positive correlation between serum EDN levels
and the disease severity of patients with chronic
urticaria. These results were consistent with a

TABLE 2. Regression analysis for the predictors for elevated EDN in chronic urticaria

PREDICTORS [8 |

-5.065
5.720
5.752
0.178

STD. ERROR
1.163
0.966
0.714
0.092

UAS: Urticaria Activity score; EDN: eosinophil-derived neurotoxin
Dependent Variable: EDN (ng/ml)
Significant (p-value <0.05)

previous study by Toyoda et al,"* in which the
high serum ECP and the presence of necrotic
eosinophils in the dermis of patients with severe
CU suggest abnormal activity of eosinophils,
which is responsible for a massive and rapid
degranulation. However, these results were

best described by Lamkhioued et al,'° who
showed that the activation of eosinophils leads
to degranulation, consisting of the extracellular
telease of the cationic proteins contained in
granules. The type of cationic proteins released
by eosinophils is selectively dependent on the
activated receptor, a mechanism of piecemeal
degranulation. Another study by Lorenzo et

al” showed that the serum ECP levels and
eosinophilic numbers in the blood of patients
with CU were significantly and positively
correlated with disease activity and severity,
suggesting the involvement of eosinophils in the
pathology of CU.

CONCLUSION

The significantly higher serum eosinophilderived neurotoxin level in patients with CU
suggests its role in the pathogenesis of the
disease, and the significant positive correlation
of the serum EDN level with the severity of CU
suggests promising future in its therapy.

As the results of the present study revealed a
positive correlation between serum EDN levels
and disease severity, and also showed that the
frequency of attacks, itching, and number of
wheals were significant predictors of elevated
EDN in patients with CU, it’s possible that EDN
could be used not only for diagnosing CU in the
future, but also as a prognostic factor.

REFERENCES

1. Grattan C. Chronic urticarial: General Principles and
Management. In: Greaves MW, Kaplan AP (eds.) Urticaria
and Angioedema. New York: Marcel Dekker;2004:343-368.

2 Cugno M, Marzano AV, Tedeschi A, et al. Expression of tissue
factor by eosinophils in patients with chronic urticaria. Int

JCAD

 

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

UNSTANDARDIZED COEFFICIENTS | | STANDARDIZED COEFFICIENTS fe | Pern

-0.358
0.600
0.564
0.187

~4,353
5.923
8.054
1.933

<0.001*

<0.001*

<0.001*
0.060

Arch Allergy Immunol. 2009;148(2):170-174.

Simon D, Simon HU, Yousefi S. Extracellular DNA traps in
allergic, infectious, and autoimmune diseases. Allergy.
2013;68(4):409—-416.

Soragni A, Yousefi S, Stoeckle C, et al. Toxicity of eosinophil
MBP is repressed by intracellular crystallization and
promoted by extracellular aggregation. Mol Cell.
2015.19;57(6):1011-1021.

Rosenberg HF, Dyer KD, Foster PS. Eosinophils: changing
perspectives in health and disease. Nat Rev Immunol.
2013;13(1):9-22.

Mlynek A, Zalewska-Janowska A, Martus P, et al. How to
assess disease activity in patients with chronic urticaria?.
Allergy. 2008;63(6):777-780.

Sussman G, Hébert J, Gulliver W, etal. Insights and
advances in chronic urticaria: a Canadian perspective.
Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol. 2015. 11;11(1):7.

Gilfillan AM, Tkaczyk C. Integrated signalling pathways for
mast cell activation. Nat Rev Immunol. 2006;6(3):218-230.
Staumont-Sallé D, Dombrowicz D, Capron M, Delaporte
E. Eosinophils and Urticaria. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol.
2006;30(1):13-18.

Lamkhioued B, Aldebert D, Gounni AS, et al. Synthesis
of cytokines by eosinophils and their regulation. Int Arch
Allergy Immunol. 1995;107(1-3):122-123.

Kambe N, Kitao A, Nishigori C, Miyachi Y. Late-phase
urticaria Update. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep. 2002;2(4):
288-291.

Lorenzo GD, Mansueto M, Melluso G, et al. Blood
eosinophils and serum eosinophil cationic protein in
patients with acute and chronic urticaria. Mediators
Inflamm. 1996;5(2):113-115.

Kim HS, Kim JH, Seo YM, et al. Eosinophil-derived
neurotoxin as a biomarker for disease severity and relapse
in recalcitrant atopic dermatitis. Ann Allergy Asthma
Immunol. 2017;119(5):441-445.

Gon Y, Ito R, HattoriT, et al. Serum eosinophil-derived
neurotoxin: correlation with persistent airflow limitation
in adults with house-dust mite allergic asthma. Allergy
Asthma Proc. 2015;36(6):e113—e120.

Toyoda M, Maruyama T, Morohashi M, Bhawan J. Free
eosinophil granules in urticaria: a correlation with the
duration of wheals. Am J Dermatopathol. 1996;18(1):

49-57.
