The AAPS Journal, Vol. 18, No. 1, January 2016 (© 2015)
DOT: 10.1208/s12248-015-9821-x

 

Research Article

 

Evaluation of IgE Antibodies to Omalizumab (Xolair®) and Their Potential

Correlation to Anaphylaxis

Dana L. Baker,! Gerald R. Nakamura,' Henry B. Lowman,' and Saloumeh Kadkhodayan Fischer!”

Received 13 July 2015; accepted 18 August 2015; published online 4 September 2015

 

ABSTRACT. Omalizumab (Xolair®) is a recombinant humanized monoclonal antibody that selectively
binds to human immunoglobulin E (IgE). Omalizumab is used to treat IgE-mediated diseases such as
chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU) and moderate to severe allergic asthma. In pre-marketing clinical trials
in patients with asthma, anaphylaxis was reported in 3 of 3,507 (0.1%) patients. In post-marketing
spontaneous reports, the frequency of anaphylaxis attributed to omalizumab use was estimated to be at
least 0.2% of patients based on an estimated exposure of about 57,300 patients from June 2003 through
December 2006. To better understand the risk of anaphylaxis in patients with allergic asthma receiving
omalizumab, a post-marketing pharmacosurveillance study was initiated in 2009. As part of this study, an
assay was developed to detect antibodies of IgE isotype to omalizumab. Serum samples from patients in
the study were evaluated using this assay. Our results indicated that there was no observable correlation
between either anaphylaxis or skin test reactivity and the presence of antibodies of IgE isotype to
omalizumab. Here, we discuss the development of this assay as well as the results of the immunogenicity
assessment.

 

KEY WORDS: biotin-mutant omalizumab-AAA; DIG-FceR1-IgG; IgE isotype; omalizumab (Xolair®);

omalizumab/total IgE molar ratio.

INTRODUCTION

Omalizumab (Xolair®) is a recombinant humanized
monoclonal antibody (mAb) that was designed to treat
allergic asthma and chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU) by
selectively binding to human immunoglobulin E (IgE). The
United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved omalizumab in June 2003; approval was granted in
Europe by the European Medicines Agency (EMA) in 2005.
Its use was initially limited to the treatment of moderate to
severe persistent asthma in adults and adolescents aged
12 years or older who had a positive skin test or in vitro
reactivity to a perennial aeroallergen and whose symptoms
were inadequately controlled by inhaled corticosteroids.
More recently, omalizumab received approval by the FDA
for treatment of CIU (March 2014).

 

 

‘Department of Assay Development and Technology, Genentech,
Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, California 94080, USA.

To whom correspondence should be addressed. (e-mail:
fischer.sally@gene.com)

ABBREVIATIONS ATA, Anti-therapeutic antibody; CIU, Chronic
idiopathic urticaria, CDR, Complementarity-determining region;
CCP, Confirmatory cutpoint; CPF, Cutpoint factor; CS, Confirmatory
score; ELISA, Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; FDA, Food and
Drug Administration; HRP, Horseradish peroxidase; Hu, Human;
mAb, Monoclonal antibody; PC, Positive control; NC, Negative
control; SS, Sample score; UTPR, Untreated positive rate; DIG,
Digoxigenin; IgG, Immunoglobulin G; IgE, Immunoglobulin E

® aaps’

115

Type I hypersensitivity reactions to omalizumab administration have been reported at a frequency of 0.1% in clinical
trials (n=3/3,507). Similar observations were made through
post-marketing pharmacosurveillance. Through the end of
2006, a total of 124 anaphylaxis cases associated with
omalizumab administration had been reported in postmarketing spontaneous reports of anaphylactic reactions (1).
The responses met the clinical definition of anaphylaxis
established by Sampson er al. (2,3). The reporting rate of
anaphylaxis based on the 124 cases was at least 0.2% from the
time of initial marketing through 2006 (n=124/57,269) (1).
The risk factors for these anaphylactic reactions were
uncertain given the limitations of spontaneous reports and
the lack of control data (1). Due to this increase in the rate of
anaphylaxis, a black box warning was added to the
omalizumab label in 2007.

To understand the risk factors associated with anaphylaxis
among omalizumab-treated patients, a pharmacosurveillance
data repository (Q4458g, X-PAND) was initiated in early 2009
as a post-marketing commitment. The objective of this study
was to collect data from patients treated with omalizumab who
showed or lacked hypersensitivity reactions. Data from this
study was intended to assess the risk factors for anaphylaxis
among the patient population treated with omalizumab. Data
collected included clinical histories, immunogenicity assessment,
and an optional allergy skin test (unpublished data). As part of
this study, an assay that could detect antibodies of IgE isotype to
omalizumab was developed. The purpose was to evaluate the
potential correlation of anaphylaxis to the presence of IgE

 

 

1550-7416/16/0100-0115/0 © 2015 American Association of Pharmaceutical Scientists
116

antibodies to omalizumab. The study was completed with the
final database locked in April 2014 (Genentech, Inc., data on
file). In addition to the assay described above, all samples were
also evaluated for antibodies of an immunoglobulin G (IgG)
isotype to omalizumab. To ensure assay quality, the assay
criteria were pre-specified based on available data at the time.
The target sensitivity was set at 0.1 IU/mL to ensure high
sensitivity based on data from food allergy reactions. The total
IgE tolerance was required to be >700 IU/mL as 700 IU/mL is
the highest total IgE treatment level on the omalizumab dosing
table. The omalizumab tolerance was set to 50-100 ng/mL based
on the doses that were given and the specified washout periods.
To accomplish these criteria, we designed a novel strategy that
required the use of custom designed reagents. Here, we describe
the development and characterization of the assay system as
well as the final antibody assay that was developed and qualified
to detect the IgE anti-therapeutic antibody (ATA) directed
against omalizumab.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Construction of Triple Mutants of Omalizumab
(Mutant Omalizumab-AAA)

Three alanine substitutions were made in the light chain
complementarity-determining region 1 (CDR-1) region of
omalizumab. The substitutions were introduced using Kunkel
mutagenesis as described elsewhere (4). A single oligonucleotide was designed to encompass all the substitutions (5/GATACCAGTTCATGTAGCTGGCACCAGCGTAGGCG
ACGCTCTGACTGGCAC-3’) at positions D30A, D32A,
and D34A (Genentech Oligonucleotide Synthesis Group).
The light chain plasmid containing the three mutations was
combined with the omalizumab heavy chain IgG1 plasmid
and transfected into the 293s human embryonic kidney cell
line (Genentech Cell Banking Group) for protein expression.

Construction of Anti-Omalizumab IgE-Positive Controls

The anti-omalizumab IgE-positive control was constructed
by ligating the cDNA encoding the variable heavy chain of a
murine antibody specific for the CDR of omalizumab into a
human IgE expression plasmid. In order to perform the ligation,
cloning sites were added to the cDNA of the omalizumab-specific
murine antibody. An EcoRI endonuclease restriction site was
introduced by PCR using a 5/-forward oligonucleotide that
encoded an EcoRI site. This step was followed by a mammalian
signal sequence and a 20-base pair overhang with the N-terminal
mature sequence of the omalizumab-specific murine antibody (5/CTATCGATTGAATTCCACCATGGGATGGTCATGTATC
ATCCTTTTTCTAGTAGCAACTGC AACTGGAGTACA
TI'CACAGGTTCAGCTGCAGCAGTC-3’) and a 3’-reverse
oligonucleotide that introduced a Xhol site at the 3’-end of the
variable heavy region (5‘-GATGGGGGTGTCGTTTT
GGCACTCGAGACGGTGACTGTGGTTCC-3’). A similar
format was used to introduce 5’-EcoR1 and 3’-Xhol cloning
ligation sites into the cDNA of the omalizumab-specific murine
antibody variable light region cDNA (EcoR1-forward 5/CTATCGATTGAATTCCACCATGGGATGGTCATGTATCATCCTTTTTCTAGTAGCAACTGCAACTGGAGTACATTCACAAATTGTTATCACCCAGTCTC-3’ and Xhol-reverse

Baker et al.

5'-CCGTTTTATCTCGAGCTTTGTCCCCGAGCCGAAC3’). The PCR products for both the heavy and light chains were
digested with EcoR1 and XhoI and gel purified. The mammalian
IgE expression vector was also digested with EcoR1 and Xhol
and gel purified. Purified PCR fragments and vectors were
combined and ligated overnight using T4 DNA ligase (New
England Biolabs, Cat. No. 0202S). The plasmid for antiomalizumab IgE was used for transient expression (Roche
Diagnostics, Fugene 6) of anti-omalizumab IgE from transfected
293s cells.

Patient Samples

The objective was to collect samples from 30 cases
(patients who experienced anaphylaxis upon treatment with
omalizumab) with four controls for each case (120 controls)
over 4 years. Case patients were to undergo a 16-week to 18month washout period before sample collection, and at least
one out of four control patients also needed to undergo a
washout. Collection of samples with a proper washout period
was a major logistical challenge limiting the number of
samples that were eligible for analysis.

Screening Assay

The screening assay used biotin-conjugated mutant
omalizumab-AAA diluted to 2 ug/mL to capture antibodies
directed against omalizumab. The biotin-mutant omalizumabAAA reagent was co-incubated overnight with an equal
volume of each undiluted serum sample and anti-omalizumab
IgE controls in a 96-well polypropylene microplate (Corning
Life Sciences, Cat. No. 3365) at a 1:2 dilution in-well. The
samples from the polypropylene microtiter plate were then
transferred to a streptavidin-coated 96-well microtiter plate
(StreptaWell™ High Bind; Roche Diagnostics, Cat. No. 11989-685-001) and incubated for 1 h. Next, digoxigenin (DIG)conjugated rhuFceR1-IgG at 0.5 wg/mL was added and
incubated for 1 h for detection of IgE isotype antibodies
specific for omalizumab, followed by a 1-h incubation with a
mouse anti-digoxigenin antibody conjugated with horseradish
peroxidase (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories Inc.,
Cat. No. 200-032-156) at 0.25 g/mL. A peroxidase substrate
(tetramethyl benzidine, two parts: TMB Peroxidase Substrate
(A), Kirkegaard & Perry Laboratories Cat. No. 50-76-02;
Peroxidase Solution; (B), Kirkegaard & Perry Laboratories
Cat. No. 50-65-02) was added for color development, and the
reaction was stopped by adding an equal volume of 1 M
phosphoric acid. The absorbance values of the samples in the
plate were evaluated at 450 nm, using 630 nm for reference
absorbance (SpectraMax Plus 384 microplate reader,
Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA).

Screening Assay Cutpoint Factor Determination

The screening assay cutpoint is the threshold at which a
sample with an assay signal at or above the cutpoint is
determined to be positive for ATAs, while samples that fall
below the cutpoint are determined to be negative for ATAs.
The screening assay cutpoint was computed for each plate. A
plate’s cutpoint is the product of the cutpoint factor (CPF)
and the plate’s average negative control (NC).
Evaluating IgE Antibodies to Omalizumab (Xolair®)

The screen CPF was determined by assaying a panel of
100 individual therapeutically untreated human allergic
asthma samples obtained from Bioreclamation (Hicksville,
NY). The panel was screened in duplicate at a 1:2 dilution in
two independent assays. A sample score (SS) was computed
for each sample in each assay, and each assay was typically
performed over several plates. The SS was calculated to be
the ratio of the average sample assay signal to the average
NC signal.

To target a 1% untreated positive rate (UTPR), the
estimated 99th percentile of the log transform of the SS was
computed for each of two assays. The screen CPF was the
average of the estimated 99th percentiles across both assays.
The screen CPF was determined to be 1.71 for allergic
asthma. The calculations for the screen CPF were performed
using Microsoft Excel.

Confirmatory Assay

The confirmatory assay procedure was performed to
characterize the specificity of a sample’s positive-screen
antibody response. It is a competitive binding assay, comparing the assay signal of the sample co-incubated with a mixture
of biotin-labeled and unlabeled therapeutic to the assay signal
of the sample incubated with biotin-labeled therapeutic only.
A specified decrease in the sample signal, upon incubation
with the unlabeled therapeutic compared to the sample
incubated with only biotin-labeled therapeutic, indicates that
immune complexes have formed and the assay response is
specific to the therapeutic. Both the labeled and unlabeled
therapeutic-treated samples were assayed in duplicate on the
same plate.

In this assay, the therapeutic was the mutant
omalizumab-AAA rather than native omalizumab to ensure
that only IgE antibodies specific to omalizumab were
measured and to limit the interference of total IgE. The
specificity of an IgE-positive antibody response to
omalizumab in the screening assay was confirmed by coincubating the sample overnight with an equal volume of a
mixture of 2 ,1g/mL biotin-labeled mutant omalizumab-AAA
with and without 25 j.g/mL of unlabeled mutant omalizumabAAA.

 

Confirmatory Assay Cutpoint Factor Determination

The assay confirmatory cutpoint (CCP) was determined
by assaying the same panel of omalizumab-naive individual
samples used in the screening assay CPF determination. All
samples were co-incubated overnight with an equal volume of
a mixture of 2 pg/mL biotin-labeled mutant omalizumabAAA (1 g/mL in-well) with and without 25 g/mL unlabeled
mutant omalizumab-AAA in duplicate (12.5 g/mL in-well).
Confirmatory (inhibition) scores were computed for each
sample. A sample’s confirmatory score (CS) is the sample
signal without unlabeled therapeutic mAbs minus the sample
signal with unlabeled therapeutic mAbs, divided by the
sample signal without unlabeled therapeutic, multiplied by
100%. The assay CCP, which targets a 1% UTPR, is the
estimated 99th percentile of the confirmatory scores. The
calculations were performed using Microsoft Excel.

117

Measurement of Total Omalizumab

Omalizumab concentrations in human serum samples
were measured by the omalizumab human enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) developed by Genentech,
Inc., (South San Francisco, CA) (5).

Measurement of Total IgE Levels

Serum total IgE levels were measured using the Cobas
IgE II assay (Roche Diagnostics, Cat. No. 04827031190).

RESULTS

Development of reagents was critical for the assay to
detect antibodies of IgE isotype to omalizumab.

Three unique and critical reagents were used to develop
a sensitive assay to detect antibodies of IgE isotype to
omalizumab. The approach was based on a novel strategy to
overcome interference from endogenous IgE (Fig. 1). The
first reagent was an altered version of omalizumab with
reduced binding affinity for IgE. We selected three amino
acids in the CDR of omalizumab and mutated them to
alanines (mutant omalizumab-AAA). This change significantly reduced omalizumab’s affinity for IgE, but it had a minimal
impact on the overall structure of the molecule. The second
critical reagent was a human FceR1-receptor IgG fusion
protein (rhuFceR1-IgG) that bound to the same region on the
IgE Fe as omalizumab. This reagent distinguishes between
IgE anti-therapeutic antibody bound to omalizumab versus
non-specific IgE that omalizumab bound to since once
omalizumab is bound to IgE, the receptor could not bind to
it. The third critical reagent was a recombinant chimeric
human IgE where the variable heavy chain and the variable
light chain in the human IgE were replaced with a murine
monoclonal antibody variable heavy chain and variable light
chain that was specific to the CDR of omalizumab. This
chimeric human IgE reagent was used as the IgE-positive
control for the assay.

Anti-omalizumab IgE ATA

“I

- * *,

: 5
1

*  |BE |

te

  

  

Sennett?
weet,
. %

 

S
e

o .

“ean?

Anti-omalizumab IgE ATA

Fig. 1. Omalizumab can bind to endogenous IgE as well as to antiomalizumab IgE ATA
118

Characterization of Critical Reagents

Affinity Comparison of Omalizumab and the Omalizumab-AAA
Mutant for Human IgE

Varying levels of human (Hu) IgE were captured on
microtiter plates coated with either omalizumab or mutant
omalizumab-AAA. The bound Hu IgE was detected with a
horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-labeled goat anti-Hu IgE polyclonal antibody. The mutant omalizumab-AAA bound Hu IgE by
approximately 100-fold less when directly compared to IgE binding
to omalizumab (Fig. 2). The affinities of the anti-omalizumab IgEpositive control for omalizumab and mutant omalizumab-AAA
were evaluated to ensure that the positive control generated could
detect both omalizumab and mutant omalizumab-AAA equally.
The assay was specifically designed to detect the binding of the
positive control to omalizumab or the mutant omalizumab-AAA
while eliminating the binding of omalizumab/mutant omalizumabAAA to the Fe fragment of the positive control. Microtiter plates
were first coated with rhuFceR1-IgG to capture the Fc fragment of
the positive control and thereby block the ability of omalizumab/
mutant omalizumab-AAA to bind to the Fe fragment of the
positive control. Varying levels of omalizumab or omalizumabAAA mutant were then in turn captured by the rhuFceR1-IgGbound positive control, and the resulting IgE/omalizumab complexes of anti-omalizumab IgE-positive control specifically bound
to omalizumab or mutant omalizumab-AAA were detected with
an HRP-labeled goat anti-Hu IgG polyclonal antibody. The antiomalizumab IgE-positive control demonstrated similar binding to
both omalizumab and mutant omalizumab-AAA (Fig. 3).

 

 

Final Assay Format: Distinguishing Between Endogenous
and Specific IgE

Biotin-labeled mutant omalizumab-AAA with ~100-fold
reduced affinity for endogenous IgE was used as the capture
reagent. Samples were incubated with biotin-labeled mutant

 

   
  
   
 

 

 

a 3.5 bem} + ont {$ret
°
3.— Omalizumab
==(J== Omalizumab-AAA Mutant /°
2 2.5 + _
2
.
g 2 :
a ~ 100-fold s
Hy Ce ol
S 1.5 a
° .
.
1 .
.
.
s
0.5 | .
.
.
Omer Eee and pascnng uuu} te cass na ae
0 0.1 1 10 100 1000 10°

[Hu IgE], [U/mL

Fig. 2. Omalizumab-AAA mutant demonstrates 100-fold lower affinity

Baker et al.

omalizumab-AAA. The omalizumab-specific IgE antibody/
biotin-omalizumab-AAA complexes were captured on a
streptavidin-coated microtiter plate. The plate-bound complexes were detected with a recombinant human FceRI IgG
fusion protein that bound the Fe fragment of human IgE
(Fig. 4). The FceRI IgG reagent was not able to detect any
non-specific human IgE bound by omalizumab-AAA. The
combination of the mutant omalizumab for capture and the
FceRI IgG detection reagent ensured the selective detection
of ATA consisting of omalizumab-specific IgE. Final assay
validation parameters are summarized in Table I.

The anti-omalizumab IgE isotype assay demonstrated
suitable tolerance for total IgE.

The potential cross-reactivity of total IgE in this assay
was tested by analyzing 100 individual allergic asthma human
serum samples with a broad range of endogenous total IgE
levels (22-5,340 IU/mL). As part of the determination of the
screening cutpoint factor (CPF) and the confirmatory
cutpoint (CCP) threshold, each of the 100 individual serum
samples was analyzed twice in the screening assay and once in
the confirmatory assay. No correlation was observed between
the sample total IgE levels and signal in either the screening
or confirmatory assays (Fig. Sa, b). Total IgE levels up to
5,340 IU/mL were evaluated confirming the high endogenous
IgE tolerance of the assay.

Omalizumab tolerance in the IgE ATA assay was
dependent on both omalizumab and total IgE.

The omalizumab tolerance in the assay was determined
by assaying four levels of anti-omalizumab IgE-positive
control antibody (0, 0.1, 0.4, and 1.6 IU/mL) in the presence
of four levels of omalizumab (0, 20, 50, and 125 ng/mL) in
four allergic asthma individual human serum samples and the
human negative control (NC) serum (Fig. 6a). The
omalizumab therapeutic levels chosen were based on the
expected concentrations in the study population at the time of
ATA sample collection after the washout period. The four
individual allergic asthma human serum samples and NC

 

7

Hu IgE
Omalizumab or SN 7
Omalizumab-AAA Mutant

 

than omalizumab for Hu IgE
Evaluating IgE Antibodies to Omalizumab (Xolair®)

119

Murine IgG variable

domains V,,, V,

a™

 

    
 

 

 

 

b
3.5
3
= = Omalizumab
= 2.5 °{t°Mutant-omalizumab |
<4
5 f |
ao 2
3
2 ]
e 1.5 |
°
1
0.5 af
— auc m f 4
0 0.01 =0.1 1 10 100 1000

[Omalizumab-Specific IgE], ng/mL

Fig. 3. a An engineered chimeric human IgE antibody that consists of

Human IgE domains
Cy1, C42, C43, C44

HRP
A Nee IgG
Omalizumab or
Mutant-omalizumab ="

en

a human IgE constant domain (gray) with a murine IgG variable domain

Omalizumab-Specific IgE
Positive Control

Fc ¢RI coat

 

(black) containing a complementarity-determining region (CDR) that is specific for the CDR epitopes of omalizumab. The murine IgG
variable domain was obtained from a Genentech proprietary monoclonal antibody. b Anti-Omalizumab IgE- positive control demonstrates

comparable affinity for omalizumab and omalizumab-AAA mutant

serum had a wide range of endogenous total IgE levels (30,
91, 318, 982, and 177 IU/mL), providing samples with a wide
range of omalizumab/total IgE molar ratios (0 and 0.01-2.2).
The low-level IgE ATA concentration of 0.1 IU/mL was
targeted at the desired sensitivity level of the assay. A sample
with a mean OD/cutpoint OD ratio>1.00 was considered
positive in the assay.

As expected, samples with higher levels of IgE antibodies
to omalizumab (positive control) tolerated higher levels of
omalizumab compared to samples with low levels of IgE
antibodies to omalizumab (Fig. 6b). These experiments confirmed that with the positive control antibody in this assay, lowlevel IgE ATA-positive samples (0.1 IU/mL) could only be
detected when the omalizumab/total IgE molar ratio was <0.1.
However, as shown in Fig. 6b, higher levels of specific IgE could
easily be detected at molar ratios greater than 0.1.

Immunogenicity and Skin Test Evaluation of the Study
Subjects

Serum samples from all eligible patients (21/30 patient
samples, see “MATERIALS AND METHODS”) were analyzed
for antibodies of IgE and IgG isotype to omalizumab (Table II).
There were no ATAs of IgG or IgE isotypes detected among the
eligible cases or control subjects (21 cases; 10 controls). In addition,
all 10 subjects enrolled in the skin test sub-study (three anaphylaxis
case subjects and seven control subjects) were skin tested with
both omalizumab and placebo. Nine of these subjects (three
anaphylaxis case subjects and six control subjects) were eligible for
ATA analysis based on the inclusion criteria. None of the eligible
cases had a positive skin reaction to omalizumab or to excipient.
Two of seven controls tested positive for both omalizumab and
excipient but tested negative in the IgE and IgG antibody assays.
120

HRPMu anti-DIG mAb

dx

rhuFceR1-IgG
.

| -on" =|
\
4

7 *,
\ .
Biotin-omalizumab- \ SN 7
AAA Mutant N, cd
Sey B o

Endogenous IgE

    

 

A
1
I

Li

BS
ae i

SA’ SA’ SAI SAI

Streptavidin-coated microtiter plate
Fig. 4. Anti-omalizumab IgE ATA assay. The assay is a semihomogenous colorimetric enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA). Serum samples are pre-incubated with biotin-labeled
omalizumab-AAA mutant to form complexes of anti-omalizumab
IgE and biotin-omalizumab-AAA mutant. The complex is then
captured on a streptavidin-coated microtiter plate and detected using
a combination of DIG-labeled rhuFceR1-IgG and HRP-labeled antiDIG mAb. The FceR1 is not able to bind to the Fe fragment of
human IgE if it is bound by omalizumab. Therefore, only antiomalizumab IgE is detected by the DIG-rhuFceR1-IgG

DISCUSSION

Anaphylaxis is a serious, potentially life-threatening
reaction that involves multiple organs and is usually rapid in
onset. It is an IgE-mediated type I hypersensitivity reaction
that results in mast cell activation and release of multiple
mediators such as histamine, leukotrienes, and cytokines
including tumor necrosis factor (TNF) (6). Whereas anaphylactic reactions have been reported after treatment with
several monoclonal antibodies, their rates have generally
been less than 1% (7-14). To date, the only published case
that has reported a high rate of hypersensitivity reactions has
been with cetuximab. In that case, the risk was reported to be
higher in particular areas of the southeastern USA (15,16)
due to environmental factors leading to development of an
anti-alpha-gal IgE, a carbohydrate known to be present on
cetuximab as a result of the production cell line (15). These
hypersensitivity reactions were immediate and severe in
nature, primarily occurring during the initial cetuximab
infusion, supporting the role of pre-existing IgE targeting
cetuximab. In fact, pre-existing IgE against cetuximab has
been detected in patients who experience hypersensitivity
reactions (15-17).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Baker et al.
a
4.00
a
A
§ 3.00
a
2
£
A a
i 2.00 z aa
a a a
2 : Pa geen feb
1.00
3 Sede Tape or SA 5
0.00
= - 3 H
[Total IgE), 1U/mL >
40.0
a
§ A
8 20.0
a aan ba 2
5 Mw ye By ae
§ a a 4
E00 tie at nee abe a
= oe eae ka a
é ah ow ae’ rs
a
20.0 = Ao
a
Fi a
a
40.0
® ® 3 3
[Total IgE], U/mL. ial

 

 

 

Fig. 5. Total IgE tolerance of anti-omalizumab IgE ATA assay. One
hundred individual human sera samples with 22-5,340 [U/mL of total
IgE from patients diagnosed with allergic asthma were analyzed in
the anti-omalizumab IgE ATA assay. Neither the screening score (a)
or the confirmatory score (b) exhibited any correlation with the
sample total IgE level indicating the assay could tolerate up to
~5,340 IU/mL of total IgE

It is important to note that the reactions that are
observed with cetuximab are very different from the reactions
observed with omalizumab. The anaphylactic cases reported
for omalizumab patients range anywhere from immediate to
delayed reactions that persist from hours to days after
treatment (1). This delayed response has been previously
reported in the literature for various allergenic triggers, as
well as for cases of food-dependent exercise-induced anaphylaxis and its triggers are poorly understood, all of which make
its prevention challenging (18). In addition, although hypersensitivity reactions have occurred after first infusion with
omalizumab, the majority of the reactions have occurred after
two or more infusions (1) suggesting that the reactions are not
due to pre-existing antibodies to omalizumab.

To better understand the risk of anaphylaxis in patients
with allergic asthma who received omalizumab, a_post
Table I. Overview of Assay Validation Parameters for the Anti-Omalizumab IgE ATA Assay

 

Assay parameters

Relative sensitivity (IU/mL)

Screen cutpoint factor

Confirmatory cutpoint factor

Total IgE tolerance

Omalizumab drug tolerance (for detection of 0.1 [U/mL PC)
Hook effect (high positive at 142 [U/mL)

How positive results were reported

Results

0.041 IU/mL for allergic asthma (>target of 0.1 [U/mL)

1.71 (n=100 allergic asthma)

—25.3% (n=100 allergic asthma)

Up to ~5,000 IU/mL in allergic asthma

<0.1 omalizumab/total IgE molar ratio for allergic asthma

No hook effect found

OD/cutpoint OD ratio (no titer due to limited sample volume)

 
Evaluating IgE Antibodies to Omalizumab (Xolair®) 121

VuWul

301U/mL 90 1U/mL

OUI.
anti-omalizumab IgE

@ o-11Uimi.
anti-omalizumab IgE

0.4 1UmL.
~ anti-omalizumab IgE

4.6 1UimL.
anti-omalizumab IgE

177 (U/mL 3201U/mL 980 1U/mL Total IgE

  

jOD/Cutpoint OD
i N Sy > Ratio Threshold
O1UmL 0.11UimL 0.4 1UimL 1.6 IU/mL. Positive control

(anti-omalizumab IgE)

OD/Cutpoint OD Ratio

    

N ‘SS ™
OngimL 25 ngimL

50ngimL 125 ngimL Omalizumab

 

 

10

Omalizumab/Total IgE Molar Ratio
Fig. 6. Drug (omalizumab) tolerance of anti-omalizumab IgE ATA assay. Omalizumab has the potential to create false-negative results in the
anti-omalizumab IgE ATA assay by binding to the sample anti-omalizumab IgE and preventing its detection. To determine the omalizumab
tolerance of the assay, a set of 80 human serum samples containing four levels of anti-omalizumab IgE (0, 0.1, 0.4, and 1.6 IU/mL) and a variety
of omalizumab/total IgE molar ratios (0, 0.01-2.2) were prepared. Combinations of four levels of omalizumab (0, 20, 50, and 125 ng/mL) were
added to five human sera with different levels of total IgE (30-982 IU/mL) and four levels of anti-omalizumab IgE. In order to detect low

positive anti-omalizumab IgE (0.1 IU/mL), the omalizumab/total IgE molar ratio needed to be approximately less than 0.1 (see Fig. 6b)

marketing pharmacosurveillance study was initiated, and as
part of this study, an assay to detect IgE antibody to
omalizumab was developed.

Development of an assay that could detect antibodies of
IgE isotype specific for omalizumab which is itself an anti-IgE
antibody was a challenging task, especially in the allergic
asthma population which has high and variable levels of total
IgE. Significant technical challenges were overcome in
developing an assay to detect antibodies of IgE isotype to
omalizumab. One challenge was the high and variable levels
of total IgE in the asthmatic population. The omalizumab
dosing table is designed to treat patients with baseline total
IgE levels as high as 700 IU/mL. However, these levels can be
further elevated by binding of IgE to omalizumab which
decreases its clearance rate and elevates total IgE levels in
serum. Elevated total IgE in the samples can significantly
interfere in an assay designed to detect IgE specific for
omalizumab. In addition, levels of omalizumab are also
expected to be variable in these patients due to a large
washout period window (16 weeks—18 months) before sample
collection. The study was designed to have a washout period
of at least 4 months or ~4 half-life to minimize the drug
interference in the assay. We do acknowledge however that

Table II. Skin and Antibody of IgE Isotype

the longer washout period may potentially lead to falsenegative signal. This large washout window was based on
logistical challenges of the study (discussed further below)
and is also the reason for the ineligibility of a large number of
patients.

The second challenge was the need to distinguish
between omalizumab bound by IgE (omalizumab-specific
IgE) and IgE bound by omalizumab (non-omalizumabspecific IgE). Omalizumab binds to endogenous IgE with
high affinity (Kd=15.5 nM). In addition, omalizumab can also
bind to IgE ATAs that are directed against it. The third
challenge was the sensitivity requirements needed to be
achieved in the current assay.

In order to increase sensitivity as well as specificity in our
assay and detect IgE antibodies specific for omalizumab while
minimizing the detection of IgE antibodies that were not
specific for omalizumab (essentially total IgE), a mutant form
of omalizumab (with a mutation in the CDR region) with an
approximately 100-fold lower affinity for the Fc fragment of
IgE was used as a capture reagent. Although the affinity of
this mutated omalizumab was reduced ~100-fold, it could still
potentially bind to endogenous IgE in the patient samples. In
order to distinguish between specific antibodies of IgE isotype

Results for Eligible Patients in the Study

 

(8)

Omalizumab treated

"ASE subjects Control subjects

Omalizumab treated

 

Anaphylaxis No anaphylaxis
Main study Skin test Main study Skin test
Enrolled (118) 30 3 88 7
ATA eligible (31) 21 3 10 6
IgE ATA confirmed positive (0) 0 0
Reported IgE ATA results Negative 21 (100%) 3 (100%) 10 (100%) 6 (100%)
Positive 0 (0%) 0 (100%) 0 (0%) 0 (100%)

 
122

to omalizumab and non-specific IgE, FeeRI IgG was used for
detection. Due to the IgE Fe fragment specificity of the
detection reagent, it is unable to detect any omalizumabbound human IgE. The combined use of the mutated
omalizumab for capture and the FceRI IgG detection reagent
ensured the selective detection of omalizumab-specific IgE.
This assay was able to reliably quantitate the omalizumabspecific IgE-positive control antibody with a sensitivity of less
than 0.1 IU/mL. Samples that screened positive were
confirmed in a competitive binding assay using unlabeled
mutated omalizumab.

A tiered based strategy is typically used in immunoge
nicity assessments. In such a strategy, samples are first
evaluated in a screening and confirmatory assay followed by
further characterization including isotyping evaluations performed on the confirmed positive samples. However, this
strategy is based on the new bridging assay formats where all
antibody isotype responses to the drug can be detected. In the
case of omalizumab, the screening assay consisted of two
fragment assays: one for Fab and one for the Fe portion of the
antibody and could only detect antibodies of IgG isotype.
Therefore, in this instance, all eligible case and contro
samples from the study were tested in parallel in both the
IgG and IgE ATA assays. Our data demonstrated no
observable correlation between IgE or IgG ATAs and
anaphylaxis under our assay conditions. It also demonstrated
no apparent correlation between skin test positivity an
anaphylaxis.
It is important to highlight that in addition to the technical
challenges with this assay, there were also significant logistical
challenges. The study was designed to collect samples from 30
anaphylactic patients, and it took 5 years to collect these
samples. As mentioned earlier, only 21 of the 30 samples had
the appropriate drug washout making them eligible for this
analysis. We acknowledge that the limited sample size of this
study would make it difficult to make definitive conclusions on
correlation between anaphylaxis and presence of antibodies of
IgE isotype to omalizumab, though the study itself highlights the
challenges of design and execution of such studies even when a
suitable assay is available.

One potential explanation for the observed incidence of
anaphylaxis occurring during therapy with omalizumab could
be the higher predisposition of asthmatics to anaphylaxis and
a range of other allergy diagnoses (19). For example, a
previous history of anaphylaxis increases the risk of developing a subsequent anaphylactic reaction with omalizumab by
more than 19-fold (19). This study further reiterates the
complexities associated with understanding the causes of
anaphylactic reactions in the allergic asthma population with
higher rates of baseline anaphylaxis. Clearly, many unknowns
still remain in our understanding of the causes of these
events, and therefore preventive measures have yet to be
determined.

 

 

CONCLUSION

The post-marketing pharmacosurveillance study using a
novel assay to detect IgE antibody to omalizumab showed no
apparent correlation between either anaphylaxis or skin test
reactivity and the presence of antibodies of IgE isotype to
omalizumab.

Baker et al.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors would like to acknowledge Chris Lowe and
Rich Erickson for providing the total IgE data. We would also
like to thank Samantha Lien, Dorothea Reilly, Rod Keck, and
Reed Harris for critical reagent generation and characterization.

REFERENCES

1. Limb S, Starke P, Lee C, Chowdhury BA. Delayed onset and
protracted progression of anaphylaxis after omalizumab administration in patients with asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2007;120:1378-81.

2. Sampson H, Munoz-Furlong A, Bock SA, Schmitt C, Bass R,
Chowdhury BA, et al. Symposium on the definition and
management of anaphylaxis: summary report. J Allergy Clin
Immunol. 2005;115:584-91.

3. Sampson H, Munoz-Furlong A, Campbell RL, Adkinson Jr NF,
Bock SA, Branum A, et al. Second symposium on the definition
and management of anaphylaxis: summary report—Second
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease/Food
Allergy and Anaphylaxis Network symposium. J Allergy Clin
Immunol. 2006;117:391-7.

4. Kelley RF, Meng YG. Methods to engineer and identify IgG1
variants with improved FcRn binding or effector function G. In:
Proetzel H, Ebersbach H, editors. Methods in molecular biology:
antibody methods and protocols. New York, NY: 901 Humana
Press; 2012. p. 277-93.

5. Lowe PJ, Tannenbaum S, Gautier A, Jimenez P. Relationship
between omalizumab pharmacokinetics, IgE pharmacodynamics
and symptoms in patients with severe persistent allergic (IgEmediated) asthma. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2009;68:61-76.

6. Phil Leiberman. Definition and criteria for the diagnoses of
anaphylaxis. Mariana C. Castells, editor. Anaphylaxis and
hypersensitivity reactions. Humana Press, Springer New York;
2010. P. 1-13.

7. Edwards JC, Szezepanski L, Szechinski J, Filipowicz-Sosnowka
A, Emery P, Close DR, et al. Efficacy of B-cell-targeted therapy
with rituximab in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. N Engl J
Med. 2004;350:2572-81.

8. Bonner JA, Harari PM, Giralt J, Azarnia N, Shin DM, Cohen
RB, et al. Radiotherapy plus cetuximab for squamous-cell
carcinoma of the head and neck. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:567-78.

9. Holgate S, Casale T, Wenzel S, Bousquet J, Deniz Y, Reisner C.
The anti-inflammatory effects of omalizumab confirm the central
role in IgE in allergic inflammation. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2005;115:459-65.

10. Cheifetz A, Smedley M, Martin S, Reiter M, Leone G, Mayer L,
et al. The incidence and management of infusion reactions to
infliximab: a large center experience. Am J Gastroenterol.
2003;98:1315-24.

11. Cook-Bruns N. Retrospective analysis of the safety of Herceptin
immunotherapy in metastatic breast cancer. Oncology. 2001;61
Suppl 2:58-66.

12. Omalizumab (marketed as Xolair®) Information. Rockville, MD:
Food and Drug Administration, Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research, 2007. (Accessed February 19, 2008, at http://
www.fda.gov/cder/drug/infopage/omalizumab/default.htm.)

13. Erbitux (cetuximab). New York: Im-Clone Systems Incorporated
and Bristol-Myers Squibb, 2007 (drug product label).

14. Cheifetz A, Mayer L. Monoclonal anti-bodies, immunogenicity, and associated infusion reactions. Mt Sinai J Med.
2005;72:250-6.

15. Chung CH, Mirakhur B, Chan E, Le OT, Berlin J, Morse M,
et al. Cetuximab-induced anaphylaxis and IgE specific for
galactose-a-1,3-galactose. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:1109-17.

16. Maier S, Chung CH, Morse M, Platts-Mills T, Townes L,
Mukhopadhyay P, ef al. A retrospective analysis of crossreacting cetuximab IgE antibody and its association with severe
infusion reactions. Cancer Med. 2015;4(1):36-42.

17. O'Neil BH, Allen R, Spigel DR, Stinchcombe TE, Moore DT,
Berlin JD, et al. High incidence of cetuximab-related infusion
Evaluating IgE Antibodies to Omalizumab (Xolair®)

18.

reactions in Tennessee and North Carolina and the association 19.

with atopic history. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:3644-8.
Oyefara BI, Bahna SL. Delayed food-dependent, exerciseinduced anaphylaxis. Allergy Asthma Proc. 2007;28:64-6.

123

Iribarren C, Tolstykh IV, Miller MK, Eisner MD. Asthma and
the prospective risk of anaphylactic shock and other allergy
diagnoses in a large integrated health care delivery system. Ann
Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2010;104:371-7.
