REVIEW ARTICLE

Clin Drug Invest 2005; 25 (3): 153-164
1173-2563/05/0003-0153/$34.95/0

© 2005 Adis Data Information BV. Alll rights reserved.

Predicting and Establishing the
Clinical Efficacy of a Histamine

H1-Receptor Antagonist
Desloratadine, the Model Paradigm

Glenis Scadding

Royal National TNE Hospital, London, UK

 

  
 

Contents
POSTEO evs son one Me seein canteinds 6 EA A SERRA JR oa MEL SRRUEROUEAEINGe 6 CEA EMGAGE ea ML SRNR eRe UR ENN 53
1. Predicting and Establishing the Clinical Efficacy of a Histamine H1-Receptor Antagonist . 154
1.1. Inhibition of Inflammatory Mediators ....... 006 eee 7 .. 154
1.2. Affinity and Specificity for Hi-Receptor Antagonis' «@ 156
133: AnimalShudiésida ViVOANAYSISicccsucs wa ve ve catenin we na aaercensues : meee 156
1.4 Histamine-Induced Skin Wheal-and-Flare Model ...... : .. 157

1.5 Allergen Chamber Studies: Controlled in Vivo Experience - EB
1.6 Pivotal Clinical Tridhs 6... tte eer n nnn nt tee ees
2: ‘Application of the Model Paradlgnt sis as ai ov omens i me ene Ae i ee Oo Oe ee Wea
2.1 Desloratadine: Affinity and Specificity for Hi Receptors . .
2.2 Antiallergic and Antihistaminic Effects of Desloratadine.. 6. cece 158

   

 

2:3) In VivesAssessment:of Desloratacdline’ a was ce sseiwnancne mie oa ct eomeatiaiioieiagy one wan abe eigenen ae on wae Oinreat 60
2.4 Desloratadine: Clinical Trials in Seasonal Allergic Rhinitis and Chronic Idiopathic Urticaria ... 160
2.5 Large Observational Studies with Desloratadine.. 0... eee 61

3. Conclusions

 

Abstract

Antihistamines are well established as a mainstay for treating allergic diseases,
including seasonal and perennial allergic rhinitis as well as other conditions, such
as chronic idiopathic urticaria. The development of new antihistamines is a
multistage process that includes in vitro and in vivo assessments of the antihistaminic, anti-inflammatory and antiallergic properties of new therapies. Results of
these assessments are critical for predicting and establishing the clinical efficacy
of an antihistamine. The focus of this article is to review the investigational
methods used to assess the efficacy, safety and tolerability of newer histamine
H1-receptor antagonists. Desloratadine, a new-generation H1-receptor antagonist,
was chosen to illustrate the use of this model paradigm. Data obtained from two
large observational studies are presented, confirming results obtained from
clinical trials that the in vitro inhibition of release of inflammatory mediators such
as histamine, prostaglandins, leukotrienes and the reduction of secretion of
cytokines such as IL-4 and IL-13 at physiological concentrations is reflected in
increased efficacy, particularly upon nasal obstruction. A recent discovery that
Scadding

des- loratadine inhibits nuclear factor-kB may be the underlying explanation for
much of this extra anti-inflammatory activity.

 

Histamine was noted as a mediator of allergic
reactions in the early 1900s; the search for effective
histamine H-receptor agonists continues. Antihistamines are considered first-line treatment for immunoglobulin E (I[gE)-related allergic conditions, including mild, intermittent seasonal or perennial allergic rhinitis (SAR/PAR), and are also useful in
other disorders involving mast cell degranulation,
such as chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU).""! In the
past, evaluation of the efficacy, safety and tolerability of antihistamines was based on intensive development programmes, consisting of numerous stages
ranging from preclinical pharmacological experiments to large, post-approval clinical observational
trials. In accordance with this established paradigm,
the potency, antiallergic effects and anti-inflammatory properties of Hj-receptor antagonists have
been evaluated using a variety of methods, including
in vitro and animal model testing, the histamine-induced skin wheal-and-flare model, controlled allergen chamber trials, and pivotal clinical
efficacy and safety trials.

Each investigational method in the programme
provides some insight into the absolute and relative
efficacy of agents in this therapeutic class. In vitro
testing of Hj-receptor antagonists determines the
binding characteristics of antihistamines at the receptor level, as well as their antiallergic effects on
key effector cells and inhibitory effects on inflammatory mediators. Testing in animal models provides additional preclinical data on their antihistaminic, antiallergic and anti-inflammatory activities and may offer evidence of their mechanism of
action in humans. The histamine-induced skin
wheal-and-flare model — often used in early clinical
efficacy and potency studies — assesses the antihistaminic activity of these antagonists. Allergen
chamber models evaluate the activity of an antihistamine on allergic rhinitis symptoms due to pollen and
dust-mite aeroallergens under controlled conditions.
Although each of these methods may be useful in

© 2005 Adis Data Information BV. All rights reserved.

predicting the efficacy and safety of H1-receptor
antagonists, large well controlled multicentre
clinical trials remain the primary indicator of the
effectiveness of an agent in the treatment of allergic
disease. Before or simultaneously with the performance of these clinical studies, pharmacokinetic analyses and specialised clinical safety data (e.g. cardiovascular toxicity) are being collected.

The purpose of this article is to review the key
features of various investigational methods used
for documenting the antihistaminic, antiallergic and
anti-inflammatory mechanisms of action of H-receptor antagonists and to predict their clinical efficacy. This model paradigm was used to evaluate the
most recently available Hy-receptor antagonist,
desloratadine, and explains its efficacy in the treatment of allergic diseases.

]. Predicting and Establishing the
Clinical Efficacy of a Histamine
H)-Receptor Antagonist

1.1 Inhibition of Inflarnmatory Mediators

Allergic diseases are characterised by activation
and subsequent release of inflammatory mediators
by immune cells (e.g. mast cells, basophils and T
cells). Although histamine is the most abundant
mediator present during an allergic response, it is
only partially responsible for the symptoms associated with the disease.!! The allergic cascade involves numerous inflammatory mediators in a complex response that is composed of three distinct
immunological phases: sensitisation, early-phase allergic reaction, and late-phase allergic reaction.)

The sensitisation phase begins with exposure to
an allergen and ends with the binding of antigenspecific IgE antibodies on target mast cells.!! Acute
or early-phase allergic reaction begins when IgEbound mast cells are re-exposed to the allergen in
sensitised patients (figure 1).'4! Repeat allergen exposure initiates antigen cross-linking of mast cell
Clin Drug Invest 2005; 25 (3)
Evaluation of Antihistamines for Allergic Diseases

=

 

a Pa
i epithelium
a0 ele\| elses.

155

Early-phase
response

 

Sneezing

Itching
Rhinorrhoea
Nasal obstruction

 

Antigen

  
 
  

IL-5 /
Eotaxins
RANTES IL-4
IL-3
TNF-c.
+
Adhesion

Bone marrow molecules (ICAM-1)

Eosinophils

——> Histamine

      

 

 

 

Mast cell

+
CNS/peripheral

LTCs =——————_» nerves
PGDs
Tryptase
+
Exudation Late-phase
Vasodilation response

“ee

Cellular infiltration eosinophils:

MBP (major basic protein)

ECP (eosinophil cationic protein)

Basophils: cytokines
chemokines

 

Rhinorrhoea
Mucosal oedema

 

 

 

T lymphocytes
Macrophages

Endothelium +

 

 

 

Chronic nasal obstruction

 

Fig. 1. The mechanism and chemical mediators of the type-1 allergic reaction (adapted with permission from Baena-Cagnani'*)).

ICAM = intercellular adhesion molecule; IgE =

immunoglobulin E; IL =

interleukin; LTC = leukotriene C; PGD = prostaglandin D;

RANTES = Regulated on Activation, Normal T cell Expressed and Secreted; TNF = tumour necrosis factor.

IgE antibodies, causing rapid degranulation of mast
cells and release of numerous proinflammatory molecules (e.g. histamine, interleukins, prostaglandins,
kinins and leukotrienes). These inflammatory
mediators are collectively responsible for increasing
local blood flow and vascular permeability, stimulating excessive secretion of mucus, and reducing
airway patency in both upper and lower respiratory
mucosal tissues. The clinical outcome is a rapid
onset of sneezing, itching, rhinorrhoea and nasal
obstruction in affected patients (figure 1).?7)

Late-phase allergic reactions are noted approximately 4-6 hours following the early-phase reaction
and are characterised as a cellular inflammatory

© 2005 Adis Data Information BV. All rights reserved.

response (figure 1).!2! This response results in the
accumulation of inflammatory — granulocytes,
predominantly eosinophils, and chemoattractants
(e.g. RANTES [Regulated on Activation, Normal T
cell Expressed and Secreted], eotaxin), and the generation of cytokines (e.g. interleukin [IL]-5) by
granulocytes or lymphocytes in the respiratory mucosa. Cellular adhesion molecules (e.g. intracellular
adhesion molecule 1) permit inflammatory cells to
traverse the endothelium and enter airway tissues.!
The accumulation of eosinophils and subsequent
release of eosinophil-derived chemical mediators
establishes the late-phase allergic responses of nasal
obstruction, increased mucus production, and possi
Clin Drug Invest 2005; 25 (3)
bly, hyper-responsiveness.! Basophil-mediated
histamine and cytokine release appears to play a
subordinate role during the late-phase reaction.!7!
Clinical manifestations of this phase can include
those of the early-phase response, but nasal obstruction and increased mucus production are most commonly observed.

In vitro studies have been useful in predicting the
clinical efficacy of an antihistamine by assessing its
ability to block allergic inflammatory processes.
The ability of an Hj-receptor antagonist not only to
block the H) receptor, but also to inhibit the generation and release of histamine and other inflammatory mediators and prevent the migration and accumulation of inflammatory cells, contributes to its antiallergic activity. Jn vitro analysis has demonstrated
that among currently available second-generation
agents, this ability varies widely.!7!

1.2 Affinity and Specificity for Hi-Receptor
Antagonists: In Vitro Analysis

Unquestionably, histamine is a major contributor
in the pathophysiology of allergic conditions.'*! Following release from mast cells and basophils, the
allergic effects of histamine are mediated through
activation of the multiple H; receptors found on
blood vessels, airway, cardiac myocytes, and cells
of the central nervous system.!! The Hj receptor
appears to play a predominant role in IgE-mediated
allergic conditions because perturbation of this receptor leads to tissue responses and symptoms of
allergic rhinitis and urticaria.'*!

The binding characteristics of an Hj-receptor antagonist determine the extent to which histamine can
be blocked from binding to the Hj receptor; these
binding characteristics are also integral to the efficacy and safety of an antihistamine. In theory, the
binding of an antagonist to Hi receptors on target
cells should inhibit all effects of histamine.!! However, specific characteristics of an H1-receptor antagonist may influence its potency. Some antagonists may bind to the H; receptor in a reversible
fashion, thereby leading to more transient effects.!!°!
Nonselective Hj-receptor antagonists may lack
specificity and bind to other receptors for histamine,

© 2005 Adis Data Information BV. All rights reserved.

Scadding

serotonin and bradykinin, and cause unwanted anticholinergic effects.!!!!

Receptor-binding studies have revealed a number
of important differences among available antihistamines. First-generation antihistamines rapidly dissociate from Hj-receptor sites, which contributes to
their short duration of action. Furthermore, many
first-generation agents lack specificity for the H1
receptor; some of these agents also bind to cholinergic (muscarinic) receptors and commonly cause dry
mouth, tachycardia and constipation.!! In contrast,
select second-generation antihistamines exhibit noncompetitive antagonism for the Hi receptor and
have slow dissociation; this characteristic may explain their sustained efficacy observed in clinical
trials.!'!51 Some second-generation antihistamines
cross the blood-brain barrier and are associated with
sedation, while other antihistamines of this class
have improved receptor specificity, which reduces
the potential for adverse reactions.!'4] However, high
in vitro H-binding potency does not necessarily
imply good clinical efficacy because many other
factors (e.g. uptake, metabolism and pharmacokinetics) are also relevant.

Recently, Leurs and colleagues proposed a novel
concept referred to as inverse agonism to describe
the interaction between histamine and its cognate
receptor.!'5! In this model, binding of histamine (i.e.
agonist) to its receptor shifts the equilibrium of the
receptor from an inactive to an active state. Any
molecule that binds to the receptor (e.g. antihistamines) and stabilises the inactive confirmation
would be referred to as an inverse agonist. Although
this definition has not been used to redefine current
antihistamines, the authors propose that because of
their mechanisms of action, antihistamines should
be termed inverse agonists because binding to the
Hi receptor stabilises the inactive conformation and
ultimately downregulates receptor activity in the
absence of an agonist.!!5!

1.3 Animal Studies: In Vivo Analysis

Animal models permit the investigation of an
antihistamine in an in vivo setting. They provide
additional preclinical evidence of antiallergic and

Clin Drug Invest 2005; 25 (3)
Evaluation of Antihistamines for Allergic Diseases

antihistaminic activity. Antiallergic effects are commonly assessed using sensitised guinea pigs or allergic monkeys; antihistaminic effects are often evaluated in the mouse-paw model. It is important to note
that while animal models can provide invaluable
insight into the efficacy and safety of a particular
therapy, the results obtained may not correlate with
what is observed in humans due to intrinsic species
variability.

1.4 Histamine-Induced Skin
Wheal-and-Flare Model

The histamine-induced skin wheal-and-flare
model has been widely used,!'®! but has several
limitations. Although histamine is a well recognised
mediator of an allergic response, a true allergic
reaction results from a multitude of interactions
among numerous cells and mediators. The whealand-flare response following histamine injection
mimics the early phase of the allergic reaction, but
there is no mast cell degranulation or inflammatory
mediator release and the late-phase response is lacking.!'6l Considerable variability has been reported in
the activity of available antihistamines in the histamine-induced wheal-and-flare model, and data often
do not correlate with results from clinical studies in
patients with symptomatic allergic diseases.!'7'9! As
such, the clinical effectiveness of an antihistamine
may not necessarily be accurately predicted.

 

1.5 Allergen Chamber Studies:
Controlled in Vivo Experience

Large, well designed, placebo-controlled, prospective clinical trials provide the best indication of
the efficacy of an antihistamine (see Pivotal Clinical
Trials). Findings from such clinical trials may be
limited because certain factors cannot be readily
controlled. These factors can include weather conditions, annual and diurnal variation in pollen levels,
and antigenic variability of pollens of similar species. Allergen chamber studies allow the effects of
an antihistamine on a specific allergic disease to be
followed under controlled conditions over time. Recently, allergen chamber studies have been used to
test the onset of action, duration of effect, and the

 

 

© 2005 Adis Data Information BV. All rights reserved.

157

efficacy of antihistamines in reducing the symptoms
of allergic rhinitis during allergen exposure.2°?")
Under these controlled conditions, antihistamines
rapidly improve and reduce symptoms of allergic
rhinitis.°°! Although this type of clinical study is
often limited in the size of the patient population,
and symptom severity is rated by subjective scales,
it does provide additional evidence of the clinical
activity of an antihistamine.

1.6 Pivotal Clinical Trials

Pivotal clinical trials are typically large, multicentre, prospective, randomised, double blind, parallel group and placebo controlled in design.
Clinical trials are the best indicator of the effectiveness, safety and tolerability of an antihistamine in
the treatment of allergic diseases. In contrast to
controlled allergen chamber studies, exposure to an
allergen in pivotal clinical trials involves natural
environmental exposure in the clinical practice setting (i.e. fall and spring allergy seasons). Clinical
studies allow for the assessment of long-term (26
weeks) therapy on symptom reduction. They also
permit testing in a broad patient population under
conditions that approximate the clinical practice setting. Patient assessments are standardised, and statistical analysis of data provides scientifically meaningful information for establishing the efficacy of an
agent.

Clinical trials with antihistamines have been used
to test their efficacy and safety in a range of diseases, including SAR, PAR and CIU. Pivotal trials of
patients with CIU allow for assessment of the
clinical efficacy of an antihistamine in a broad patient population over a longer period of time and are
more likely to capture all stages of this relapsing
disease. Pivotal clinical trials for this disease generally focus on symptom abatement, thus providing
results that accurately reflect the ability of an antihistamine to inhibit the systemic allergic process.

The final arbiter of the clinical usefulness of a
drug in the ‘real world’ is postmarketing surveillance studies. These studies provide two key beneficial effects not found in phase III clinical studies:
(i) the beneficial effects possibly due to close moni
Clin Drug Invest 2005; 25 (3)
158

Scadding

Table |. Receptor-binding affinity? of histamine antagonists for the human histamine H1 receptor (list in order of decreasing relative

potency)I"3)

Compound Ki (nmol/L + SEM)
Desloratadine 0.87 + 0.1
Mepyramine (pyrilamine) 1.7401
Levocetirizine 2.0+01
Mizolastine 22+6
Terfenadine 4044.4
Cetirizine 47.2+10
Ebastine 51.7468
Loratadine 138 + 23
Fexofenadine 175 + 68

Relative potency
201

103

88

8.0

44

3.7

3.4

1.2)

1.0

 

a_ Affinity constants obtained from 3H-labelled mepyramine binding to human recombinant histamine Hi receptor from membranes of

Chinese hamster ovary cells.

Ki = apparent dissociation constant; SEM = standard error of the mean.

toring of patients are no longer apparent, and (ii) the
patients selected are from a ‘real-life’ setting and not
the highly selected patients who are enrolled in
clinical trials.

Accurately assessing the clinical efficacy and
safety of antihistamines is a multimodal paradigm,
which begins with studies evaluating in vitro binding and concludes with large postmarketing surveillance studies. In the following section, the various
methods used to evaluate antihistamines illustrate
the developmental process for evaluating the efficacy of the Hj-receptor antagonist desloratadine.
Preclinical and clinical data on desloratadine will be
presented and discussed to illustrate its antihistaminic, antiallergic and anti-inflammatory properties, as well as its clinical efficacy in treating allergic
conditions such as SAR and CIU.

2. Application of the Model Paradigm

2.1 Desloratadine: Affinity and Specificity
for Hi Receptors

The efficacy of an antihistamine is mediated, in
part, by its specificity, affinity and avidity to the
Hi receptor. The in vitro pharmacology of
desloratadine on the human Hj receptor was studied
using Chinese hamster ovary cells.!'*! Desloratadine
demonstrated marked H1-receptor binding affinity
to these cells compared with other commonly used
antihistamines, including cetirizine, ebastine, fexo
© 2005 Adis Data Information BV. All rights reserved.

fenadine and loratadine.!'3! Similar to other secondgeneration agents, desloratadine exhibited noncompetitive antagonism of the human Hj receptor, as
well as high specificity with a very slow dissociation
rate.'!31 Competitive-binding studies indicated that
desloratadine has approximately a 50-200 times
greater affinity for the human Hj receptor than
cetirizine and fexofenadine, respectively (table I).!!*!
These results are consistent with earlier data showing desloratadine to be 52-355 times more selective
for the human Hi receptor than human muscarinic
receptors.!!3! However, the clinical significance of
these in vitro findings has not been determined in
comparative clinical trials.

2.2 Antiallergic and Antihistaminic Effects
of Desloratadine

In vitro studies with desloratadine revealed that
the antihistamine inhibits the expression or release
of some inflammatory mediators that may contribute to allergic disease.!??! Desloratadine has been
shown to block the action of histamine and other
mediators and to inhibit both early- and late-phase
reactions.'?3! Desloratadine inhibited IgE- and nonIgE-mediated histamine release from human
basophil leukocytes at micromolar concentrations in
a dose-dependent manner.’4! In contrast, first-generation antihistamines have inhibited histamine release at low concentrations, but stimulated release at
higher concentrations.'?>!

Clin Drug Invest 2005; 25 (3)
Evaluation of Antihistamines for Allergic Diseases

The ability of desloratadine to inhibit the generation and release of a variety of inflammatory
mediators from human tissue and blood cells has
been demonstrated in several studies. Using human
skin and lung tissues, therapeutic concentrations of
desloratadine reduced the number of preformed and
de novo synthesised mediators following antigen
challenge.'5! Specifically, desloratadine inhibited
the release of histamine, prostaglandin D2 (PGD2),
leukotriene C4 (LTC4), and tryptase from humanderived basophils and mast cells. In a study investigating an effect on cytokine release, desloratadine
significantly reduced the secretion of IL-3, IL-6,
IL-8, tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a), and
granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(GM-CSF) from human leukaemic mast cells compared with cetirizine (figure 2).!°! A study using
human basophils showed desloratadine inhibited
IgE-mediated histamine and LTC release and reduced, to a much greater extent, the secretion of IL-4
and IL-13, with a concentration-dependent effect.!??!

Desloratadine caused a marked reduction in histamine-induced membrane expression of intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1 and human leukocyte class II antigens in a study using human epithelial cells.27! In nanomolar concentrations,
desloratadine inhibited endothelial expression of Pselectin — a surface molecule responsible for the
adhesion of neutrophils and eosinophils to endothe
159

lial cells — and reduced the secretion of IL-6 and IL8.281 In a study that used eosinophils from patients
with allergic rhinitis or allergic asthma, desloratadine inhibited platelet-activating factor-induced eosinophil chemotaxis and TNF-o-induced
eosinophil adhesion in a concentration-dependent
manner.’°! Furthermore, desloratadine significantly
inhibited phorbol myristate acetate-induced generation of superoxide radicals, which are also implicated in the pathophysiology of allergic disease. A
recent discovery that desloratadine inhibits nuclear
factor-kB may be the underlying explanation for
much of this extra anti-inflammatory activity.°!

In vitro findings may correlate with the antiallergic effect of an antihistamine, as well as some
of its clinical characteristics. The potency, slow dissociation rate, and noncompetitive binding of
desloratadine were predictive of its antihistaminic
activity and long duration of action. The ability of
desloratadine to inhibit the generation and release of
histamine and other mediators of inflammation and
to block immunological inflammatory processes indicated that it should have a broad, systemic antiinflammatory effect on both early- and late-phase
responses. Together, these results suggested that
desloratadine should have a strong and durable antiallergic effect, a concept that was tested in animal
models and clinical trials.

Proinflammatory mediators

IL-6 IL-8

TNF-a IL-3 GM-CSF

 

 

104

20 4

 

~30 4

40 4

50 4

Inhibition of mediator release (%)

60 4

 

-70 +

 

 

 

Hi Desloratadine 10-°M
O Cetirizine 10°M

Fig. 2. Comparison of mediator inhibition by the histamine H1-receptor antagonists desloratadine and cetirizine (adapted with permission
from Lippert et al. and Blackwell Science). GM-CSF = granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor; IL = interleukin; TNF = tumour

necrosis factor. * p < 0.05 compared with cetirizine.

© 2005 Adis Data Information BV. All rights reserved.

Clin Drug Invest 2005; 25 (3)
160

156 4 103%

100 4
80 4

Hi Resistance
O Compliance

60 4 44%
40 4
20 4
0
-20 4
40 4
-60 4
-80 4

 

Mean percent change from baseline

33%

 

52%

Placebo Desloratadine

Fig. 3. Inhibition by desloratadine of acute allergic bronchospasms
in cynomolgus monkeys (adapted with permission from Kreutner et
al.8). * p < 0.0025 compared with placebo.

2.3 In Vivo Assessment of Desloratadine

Testing in animal models with desloratadine confirmed the findings reported from in vitro pharmacology studies and provided in vivo evidence of its
antiallergic activity.

In a murine model of inflammation, desloratadine significantly reduced paw swelling following intraplantar histamine injection with an effective dose (ED)so value of 0.15 mg/kg compared
with equivalent amounts of its parent molecule,
loratadine.'*! When orally administered, the EDso
for desloratadine was 0.15 mg/kg in conscious guinea pigs receiving a lethal dose of histamine intravenously.'®! Following topical application to the upper
airways of guinea pigs, desloratadine potently inhibited histamine-induced increases in microvascular
permeability (ED50 value = 0.9ug).'*! In monkeys
challenged with histamine, desloratadine at a dose
of 6.5 mg/kg significantly inhibited (>90% inhibition) histamine-induced bronchospasm (i.e. increase
in pulmonary resistance, decrease in lung compliance).|8!

Animal studies discerned the effect of desloratadine on cough and bronchoconstriction. In
ovalbumin-sensitised guinea pigs, desloratadine significantly and dose-dependently reduced the number
of coughs induced by aerosolised ovalbumin compared with loratadine.'*! In monkeys naturally allergic to the nematode Ascaris suum, desloratadine

© 2005 Adis Data Information BV. All rights reserved.

Scadding

therapy significantly reduced airway resistance to
44% compared with 103% for the control group
(figure 3).'$! The results of these animal model studies provide evidence that desloratadine is an effective antihistamine worthy of clinical evaluation.

2.4 Desloratadine: Clinical Trials in
Seasonal Allergic Rhinitis and Chronic
Idiopathic Urticaria

Phase III trials with desloratadine have established its efficacy in reducing the symptoms of SAR
and CIU with a rapid onset of action and a durable
effect.3!"2] In the SAR studies, desloratadine
demonstrated improvement of SAR symptoms, including nasal obstruction, compared with placebo in
patients with moderate-to-severe SAR (figure
4).62.331 Desloratadine reduced both nasal (i.e. rhinorrhoea, nasal obstruction or stuffiness, nasal itching and sneezing) and non-nasal (i.e. itching or
burning eyes, tearing or watering eyes, redness of
eyes, and itching of ears or palate) symptoms compared with placebo. These effects were sustained for
the 24-hour dosing period and the entire 2-week
treatment period.!?!

Two separate double-blind, placebo-controlled,
crossover studies with desloratadine illustrated the
potential value of controlled allergen chamber studies.2°211 The effect of desloratadine on nasal obstruction in asymptomatic patients with at least a
2-year history of SAR was objectively assessed by

lM Desloratadine

   

 

© Placebo
Time

Day Day Day Week Week
2 0 2.3.4 1 1 i fi
oe
BS
83-1
ee
eg 2
OE
@
&& 2a 3
2s
SS -4
Se
a= 5
= *

Fig. 4. The effect of desloratadine on allergy symptoms in pivotal
clinical trials.!°231 Effect on seasonal allergic rhinitis (adapted with
permission from Meltzer et al.!°2)). * p < 0.01 compared with placebo.

Clin Drug Invest 2005; 25 (3)
Evaluation of Antihistamines for Allergic Diseases

2.05
1.84
1.65
1.44
1.24
1.04
0.85

0.65

Mean change from baseline
in nasal obstruction scores

0.44

0.25

 

161

Less
relief

i Desloratadine
O Placebo More

relief

 

 

0 T T T T T
15 45 75 105 135 = 165

T T T T T T
195 225 255 285 315 345

Allergen exposure time (min)

Fig. 5. The effect of desloratadine on nasal obstruction with controlled allergen exposure (reprinted from Horak et al., with permission from
Elsevier Science?°)). * p < 0.05, t p < 0.01,  p < 0.001 compared with placebo.

endoscopy and rhinomanometry-measured nasal airflow. Following exposure!!! and re-exposure!°! to
grass pollen in the Vienna Challenge Chamber, patients treated with desloratadine experienced a lower
severity of nasal and non-nasal symptoms of systemic AR, including nasal obstruction, compared
with placebo (figure 5),!*!! with early onset of effect
and durable efficacy.

In controlled clinical trials, desloratadine rapidly
improved the symptoms of CIU (<24 hours) and
provided sustained relief (6 weeks) for patients
with moderate-to-severe disease (figure 6).64%>!
Desloratadine reduced pruritus and total symptom
scores, as well as the number and size of hives.
Treatment with desloratadine resulted in less interference with sleep and daily activities than placebo. 34]

2.5 Large Observational Studies
with Desloratadine

Large clinical studies are required by regulatory
authorities to verify the efficacy and safety of a drug
prior to drug approval. Results of such pivotal
clinical trials can be an excellent indicator of the
safety and effectiveness of an antihistamine in the
treatment of allergic diseases. Because these trials

© 2005 Adis Data Information BV. All rights reserved.

have rigorous study designs, they often include only
patients with well defined physical and disease characteristics. Postmarketing surveillance studies provide an opportunity to evaluate the ‘real world’
profile of a drug under less stringent conditions.
These clinical trials employ both objective and subjective measures to demonstrate the rapid and sustained relief of disease symptoms provided by
the new antihistamine desloratadine. Data obtained
from such observational studies in regular clinical
settings can provide confirmation of the efficacy and
safety of a drug reported in placebo-controlled studies.

Bachert and colleagues presented data obtained
from a large observational study of patients with
SAR treated with desloratadine.!** A total of 48 000
German patients with SAR who met eligibility criteria were included in the study. Patients were monitored regularly by their physicians, and their SAR
symptoms were recorded. At the start of the study
and upon completion of therapy, patients rated the
severity of their nasal, asthma, ocular and dermal
symptoms based on a 4-point scale (0 = none, 1 =
mild, 2 = moderate, 3 = severe). Quality-of-life
parameters, including interference with daily activity and sleep disturbance, were also monitored.

Clin Drug Invest 2005; 25 (3)
162

Scadding

lH Desloratadine

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Ol Placebo
Time
Day 2 Week 1 Week 2 Week 3 Week 4 Week 5 Week 6
0

-104
€
g
= -20-4
se
ef

2
£5 -304
OB
3
gg
a2
Ee = -404
5

£6
o@ *
2 € -505
a2
eg
& 60+ *
3
=

-70 4

-80 4 .

Fig. 6. Effect on chronic idiopathic urticaria (reprinted with permission from Ring et al.'%4l). * p < 0.001 compared with placebo.

The mean duration of desloratadine therapy was
39 days; compliance with the therapy was rated as
good or excellent in 98% of patients. As demonstrated in placebo-controlled studies, desloratadine significantly reduced a wide range of symptoms associated with SAR. The majority of patients also reported a decrease in sleep disturbance caused by SAR
and an increase in daily activities. Overall, 92% of
patients and 93% of physicians rated the global
efficacy of desloratadine as good or excellent. Collectively, the results of this observational study confirmed evidence from many placebo-controlled
clinical trials regarding the clinical efficacy and
safety of desloratadine in reducing symptoms associated with SAR, including nasal congestion, and in
improving patient quality of life.

Recently, a US-wide patient experience programme requested 6000 patients with SAR to describe their most bothersome symptom, other allergy symptoms, and the interference of these symptoms on daily activity.°7! Patients self-rated their
symptoms before and after use of desloratadine.
Regardless of which was their most bothersome
symptom, 85% of patients reported being less both
© 2005 Adis Data Information BV. All rights reserved.

ered following desloratadine therapy. In addition,
following desloratadine therapy, patients were bothered less by other allergy symptoms and reported
reductions in interference with daily activities.

3. Conclusions

The drug development process is essential to
provide an indication of the pharmacotherapeutic
potential of an antihistamine and to establish its
clinical efficacy. In vitro tests have demonstrated
that second-generation antihistamines have improved H}-receptor specificity and a slower dissociation rate compared with first-generation antihistamines; second-generation agents also display noncompetitive antagonism. Studies of antihistamines
in animal models have provided in vivo evidence of
their antihistaminic, antiallergic and anti-inflammatory properties. Collectively, results from
preclinical studies provide insight into the possible
mechanisms of the antiallergic and anti-inflammatory activities of these agents.

Investigational models like the histamine-induced skin wheal-and-flare model are limited in

Clin Drug Invest 2005; 25 (3)
Evaluation of Antihistamines for Allergic Diseases

predicting the efficacy of an antihistamine. Although this model has been widely used, it measures
only antihistamine activity, mimics only the early
phase of the allergic response, does not reflect the
systemic inflammatory process underlying allergic
disease, and may not be an appropriate indicator of
clinical efficacy. Allergen chamber studies are a
reproducible method assessing the response to antihistamine therapy under controlled conditions.
These studies, however, are generally limited in
duration and by the size of the study population.
Although studies throughout the developmental process may indicate the potential of an antihistamine
and possibly its mechanisms of action in the treatment of allergic disease, well controlled pivotal
trials are the most accurate indicator of the effectiveness of an Hi-receptor antagonist in clinical practice.

For the antihistamine desloratadine, in vitro studies have revealed it to be a highly potent Hj-receptor
antagonist and inhibitor of inflammatory mediators.
Animal models with desloratadine have exhibited
both antiallergic and anti-inflammatory properties.
Under controlled chamber conditions, it rapidly improved symptoms of SAR. Ultimately, clinical trials
have established that desloratadine is effective in
reducing the symptoms of SAR, including nasal obstruction, a symptom that does not usually respond
to antihistamine treatment. In CIU, desloratadine
has a rapid onset of action and a durable effect.
Additionally, the results of a large observational
study of patients with SAR confirmed the efficacy
and safety of desloratadine in a ‘real world’ clinical
setting.

Acknowledgements

Glenis Scadding is a member of the Schering Plough
Team Allergy and has been reimbursed for lectures on
desloratadine.

References
1. Dykewicz MS, Fineman S, Skoner DP, et al. Diagnosis and
management of rhinitis: complete guidelines of the Joint Task
Force on Practice Parameters in Allergy, Asthma and Immunology. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 1998; 81: 478-518
2. Baraniuk JN. Pathogenesis of allergic rhinitis. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 1997; 99: S763-72

© 2005 Adis Data Information BV. All rights reserved.

6.

10.

11.

12.

13,

14,

15:

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

. Agrawal

163

. Pearlman DS. Pathophysiology of the inflammatory response. J

Allergy Clin Immunol 1999; 104: $132-7

. Baena-Cagnani CE. Desloratadine activity in concurrent sea
sonal allergic rhinitis and asthma. Allergy 2001; 56 Suppl. 65:
21-7

. Bochner BS, Schleimer RP. The role of adhesion molecules in

human eosinophil and basophil recruitment. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 1994; 94: 427-38

Lippert U, Moller A, Welker P, et al. Inhibition of cytokine
secretion from human leukemic mast cells and basophils by
Hi- and Hp-receptor antagonists. Exp Dermatol 2000; 9:
118-24

. Abdelaziz MM, Devalia JL, Khair OA, et al. Effect of fexo
fenadine on eosinophil-induced changes in epithelial permeability and cytokine release from nasal epithelial cells of patients with seasonal allergic rhinitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol
1998; 101: 410-20

    

. Kreutner W, Hey JA, Anthes J, et al. Preclinical pharmacology

of desloratadine, a selective and nonsedating histamine Hy

receptor antagonist. 1st communication: receptor selectivity,

antihistaminic activity, and antiallergenic effects. Arzneimittel

Forschung 2000; 50: 345-52

DK. Pharmacology and clinical efficacy of
desloratadine as an anti-allergic and anti-inflammatory drug.
Expert Opin Investig Drugs 2001; 10: 547-60

Anthes JC, Gilchrest H, Richard C, et al. Biochemical characterization of desloratadine, a potent antagonist of the human
histamine H(1) receptor. Eur J Pharmacol 2002; 449 (3): 22937

Meltzer EO. Pharmacological treatment options for allergic
rhinitis and asthma. Clin Exp Allergy 1998; 28 Suppl. 2: 27-36

Barnett A, Iorio LC, Kreutner W, et al. Evaluation of the CNS
properties of SCH 29851, a potential non-sedating antihistamine. Agents Actions 1984; 14: 590-7

Anthes J, Gilchrest H, Richard C, et al. Biochemical characterization of desloratadine, a potent antagonist of the human
histamine H(1) receptor. Eur J Pharmacol 2002; 449: 229-37

Slater JW, Zechnich AD, Haxby DG. Second-generation antihistamines: a comparative review. Drugs 1999; 57: 31-47

Leurs R, Church MK, Taglialatela M. H)-antihistamines: inverse agonism, anti-inflammatory actions and cardiac effects.
Clin Exp Allergy 2002; 32: 489-98

Monroe EW, Daly AF, Shalhoub RF. Appraisal of the validity
of histamine-induced wheal and flare to predict the clinical
efficacy of antihistamines. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1997; 99:
S798-806

Rosenzweig P, Caplain H, Chaufour S, et al. Comparative wheal
and flare study of mizolastine vs terfenadine, cetirizine,
loratadine and placebo in healthy volunteers. Br J Clin
Pharmacol 1995; 40: 459-65

Roman IJ, Kassem N, Gural RP, et al. Suppression of histamineinduced wheal response by loratadine (SCH 29851) over 28
days in man. Ann Allergy 1986; 57: 253-6

Humphreys F, Hunter JA. The effects of astemizole, cetirizine
and loratadine on the time course of weal and flare reactions to
histamine, codeine and antigen. Br J Dermatol 1991; 125: 364P

Horak F, Stubner UP, Zieglmayer R, et al. Effect of
desloratadine versus placebo on nasal airflow and subjective
measures of nasal obstruction in subjects with grass polleninduced allergic rhinitis in an allergen-exposure unit. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 2002; 109: 956-61

 

Clin Drug Invest 2005; 25 (3)
164

21.

22.

23.

24,

25;

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

Horak F, Stubner P. Decongestant activity of desloratadine in
controlled-allergen-exposure trials. Clin Drug Invest 2002; 22
Suppl. 2: 13-20

Lichtenstein LM, Schroeder JT, Schleimer RP, et al. Inhibition
of cytokine generation and mediator release in human basophils by desloratadine. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2001; 107:
$162

Schroeder JT, Schleimer RP, Lichtenstein LM, et al. Inhibition
of cytokine generation and mediator release by human basophils treated with desloratadine. Clin Exp Allergy 2001; 31:
1369-77

Kleine-Tebbe J, Josties C, Frank G, et al. Inhibition of IgE- and
non-IgE-mediated histamine release from human basophil leukocytes in vitro by a histamine H1-antagonist, desethoxycarbonyl-loratadine. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1994; 93: 494500

Lichtenstein LM, Gillespie E. The effects of the Hi and H2
antihistamines on ‘allergic’ histamine release and its inhibition
by histamine. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1975; 192: 441-50

Genovese A, Patella V, De Crescenzo G, et al. Loratadine and
desethoxylcarbonyl-loratadine inhibit the immunological release of mediators from human FceRI* cells. Clin Exp Allergy
1997; 27: 559-67

Vignola AM, Crampette L, Mondain M, et al. Inhibitory activity
of loratadine and descarboethoxyloratadine on expression of
ICAM-1 and HLA-DR by nasal epithelial cells. Allergy 1995;
50: 200-3

Molet S, Gosset P, Lassalle P, et al. Inhibitory activity of
loratadine and descarboxyethoxyloratadine on histamine-induced activation of endothelial cells. Clin Exp Allergy 1997;
27: 1167-74

Agrawal DK, Berro A, Kreutner W, et al. Anti-inflammatory
properties of desloratadine (DCL): effect on eosinophil chemotaxis, adhesion and release of superoxide anions. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 2000; 104 (1 pt 2): $16-7
Wu RL, Anthes JC, Kreutner W, et al. Desloratadine inhibits
constitutive and histamine-stimulated nuclear factor-kappaB

   

© 2005 Adis Data Information BV. All rights reserved.

31.

32.

33.

34.

935.

36.

37.

Scadding

activity consistent with inverse agonism at the histamine H1
receptor. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 2004 Dec; 135 (4): 313-8

Geha RS, Meltzer EO. Desloratadine: a new, nonsedating, oral
antihistamine. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2001; 107: 751-62

Meltzer E, Prenner B, Nayak A, et al. Efficacy and tolerability
of once-daily Smg desloratadine, an H1-receptor antagonist, in
patients with seasonal allergic rhinitis: assessment during the
spring and fall allergy seasons. Clin Drug Invest 2001; 21: 2532

Nayak AS, Schenkel E. Desloratadine reduces nasal congestion
in patients with intermittent allergic rhinitis. Allergy 2001
Nov; 56(11): 1077-80

Ring J, Hein R, Gauger A, et al. Once-daily desloratadine
improves the signs and symptoms of chronic idiopathic urticaria: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Int J
Dermatol 2001; 40: 1-5

Monroe EW, Finn A, Patel P, et al. Efficacy and safety of
desloratadine Smg once daily in the treatment of chronic
idiopathic urticaria: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. J Am Acad Dermatol 2003; 48: 535-41

Bachert C, Virchow JC, Plenker A. Desloratadine in the treatment of seasonal allergic rhinitis: results of a large observational study. Clin Drug Invest 2002; 22 Suppl. 2: 43-52

Kerney D. ‘Real-world’ treatment with desloratadine in seasonal allergic rhinitis (SAR) patients. Poster presented at the
American College of Asthma, Allergy and Immunology; 2002
Novy 14-20; San Antonio (TX)

Correspondence and offprints: Dr Glenis Scadding, Royal
National TNE Hospital, Grays Inn Road, London, WC1X
8DA, UK.

E-mail: sjjdgls@ucl.ac.uk

Clin Drug Invest 2005; 25 (3)
