[International Journal of
| Immunopathology |
\ & Pharmacology /

Letter to the editor a

 

International Journal of
Immunopathology and Pharmacology
2016, Vol. 29(2) 320-328

© The Author(s) 2015

Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0394632015623795

ij sagepub.com

@SAGE

Effective treatment of different
phenotypes of chronic urticaria with
omalizumab: Case reports and
review of literature

A Kasperska-Zajac, J Jarzab, A Zerdzinska, K Bak and A Grzanka

Abstract

Despite the excellent efficacy and safety profile of omalizumab in chronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU), there are scarce
data concerning its role in the treatment of refractory cases with different phenotypes of urticaria. We describe our
experience with the therapy of nine patients with CSU co-existing with delayed pressure urticaria (DPU) or angioedema
or both and refractory to treatment with high-dose antihistamines. The first patient, with severe CSU and recurrent
angioedema, did not respond well to cyclosporine A or corticosteroids and suffered from numerous side effects of longterm corticosteroid therapy. The second patient presented with severe symptoms of DPU, which first of all prevented
any daily activities of the professional routines. Both patients showed a complete remission of urticaria after the first
injection of omalizumab. The third patient with CSU and severe DPU had been ineffectively treated for more than
20 years with various medications. Following the administration of omalizumab, the symptoms of CSU subsided but
those of DPU intensified, and the drug was withdrawn after two cycles. In another four patients with refractory CSU
and angioedema, the symptoms subsided after the first administration of omalizumab, and the patients have been in
remission for about 5 weeks. In the remaining two patients, the symptoms did not resolve despite four 300 mg doses of
omalizumab. It is important to establish a therapeutic regimen with omalizumab (150-300 mg; every 4-8 weeks) tailored
to individual patient’s needs and dependent on the type of urticaria; this may minimize unnecessary the medication
exposure, adverse drug effects, and healthcare costs.

Keywords
chronic spontaneous urticaria, delayed pressure urticaria, omalizumab

Date received: | September 2015; accepted: 27 November 2015

Introduction

Chronic urticaria is a heterogeneous disorder, which
may be either spontaneous or induced. The disorder

an up to four-fold increase in the dosage (off-label
therapy) is recommended as the second-line option.

is most probably caused by an interactive combination of immune, genetic, and environmental factors,
including infections and is associated with the
activation of immune/inflammatory, coagulation/
fibrinolytic, and neurohormonal processes.!-?

The current guidelines recommend second-generation non-sedating H,-antihistamines (nsAHs) as
the mainstay of treatment. However, more than
half of the patients continue to develop symptoms
despite the use of standard doses, and in such cases,

In patients with chronic urticaria who do not
respond to antihistamine treatment, omalizumab,

 

Department of Internal Diseases, Dermatology and Allergology in
Zabrze, SMDZ in Zabrze, Medical University of Silesia in Katowice,
Poland

Corresponding author:

Alicja Kasperska-Zajac, Chair and Clinical Department of Internal
Diseases, Dermatology and Allergology ul. M. Curie-Sktodowskiej 10,
41-800 Zabrze, Poland.

Email: alakasperska@gmail.com
Kasperska-Zajac et al.

321

 

cyclosporine A, or montelukast is recommended as
the third-line therapy. In addition, corticosteroid
(CS) treatment may be considered during the exacerbation of symptoms. However, anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory therapies may be
unsuitable for long-term use owing to considerable
side effects and concerns about the risk:benefit
ratio.!°!! Among anti-urticarial medications, only
antihistamine drugs in licensed doses and omalizumab have been approved for use in chronic
spontaneous urticaria (CSU) by local agencies for
the registration of medicinal products. Therefore,
there has been an increasing interest in the use of
omalizumab as a well-tolerated and effective
option for inducing and maintaining long-term
remission in patients with refractory CSU, regardless of the dosing protocol or the immune status,
age, or sex of the patients.!!"'4

Despite the excellent efficacy and safety profile
of omalizumab in CSU, there are still scarce data
concerning its role in the treatment of refractory
cases with different phenotypes of urticaria.
Therefore, the aim of this paper was to describe our
experience in the treatment of patients with CSU
and delayed pressure urticaria (DPU) refractory to
treatment and to discuss the use of omalizumab in
this context.

Patients

We report a retrospective case series of nine
patients with persistent symptoms of difficult-totreat CSU co-existent with DPU or angioedema or
both and treated with omalizumab.

Attempts to control the disease with antihistamines and, in some cases, with low-to-moderate
doses of CSs, cyclosporine, or other immunosuppressive and immunomodulatory drugs were either
unsuccessful or led to unacceptable side effects. A
complete response was defined as no symptoms
and no need for the use of medications.

At the beginning of the treatment, the quality of
life index of our patients was in the range of 11-27
(very large to extremely large effect), using the
Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQD, and the
urticaria activity score for the preceding 7 days
(UAS7) was in the range of 35-42 (severe activity). In all patients, skin biopsies of urticarial
lesions were taken, and histological analyses were
performed to exclude urticarial vasculitis. Each
patient underwent the following investigations: (1)

routine laboratory tests (full blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, glucose, hepatic function; serum and plasma levels of
creatinine, immunoglobulins, and complement;
urine analysis); (2) measurement of antibodies:
antinuclear (EUROLINE ANA Profile 3;
Euroimmun), antitransglutaminase, antithyroid,
against Borrelia burgdorferi, Ascaris lumbricoides
and Toxocara canis, specific immunoglobulin E
(IgE) against food and inhalant allergens in serum
or plasma; (3) other tests (testing for antistreptolysin O, syphilis, rheumatoid factor, hepatitis serology as well as stool examinations for ova, parasites,
and Helicobacter pylori antigen). In addition,
patients were referred for dental and ear, nose, and
throat consultations and underwent abdominal
ultrasonography.

The autologous serum skin test for autoreactivity was performed in six patients. The results
were positive in four patients and negative in two
patients. Two patients suffered from Hashimoto
disease. Other relevant co-morbidities were
excluded.

Patient |

A 34-year-old woman presented to our urticaria
unit with a 3-year history of severe, difficult-totreat CSU with angioedema and DPU. The major
clinical issues in the patient were poorly controlled
CSU and frequently recurring symptoms of angioedema. No evidence of an underlying disease was
found.

The patient had undergone treatment with antihistamines at a four-fold higher dose compared
with the standard dose, alone and in combination
with montelukast, cyclosporine, and CS, but the
therapy failed to control the disease activity. She
suffered from a broad spectrum of side effects of
long-term CS therapy (including weight gain,
depression, headache, dyspeptic symptoms, mood
changes, and Cushingoid appearance).

By the time of her referral to our clinic, the
patient had been treated with dexamethasone (up
to 2 mg/d) and a high dose of nsAHs. During the
exacerbation of symptoms, she received higher
doses of CSs, which allowed to reduce the frequency of angioedema from the average of twice
a week (mainly lips and throat) to the average
of once a month. In addition, skin symptoms
were alleviated (mainly itch), and their reduced
322 International Journal of Immunopathology and Pharmacology 29(2)

 

severity could be tolerated by the patient (UAS7,
28-34). Higher CS doses were not well-tolerated
by the patient and did not significantly reduce the
symptoms.

Before starting anti-IgE therapy, the patient’s
total IgE levels were 145.7 kU/L. To our surprise,
after the first administration of omalizumab (300
mg subcutaneously), urticaria symptoms resolved
within 2 days. In addition, the patient could discontinue all concomitant medications (nsAHs and
CSs).

Importantly, during the 3 years of disease duration, the patient had not experienced a remission of
symptoms. Omalizumab was administered again at
a dose of 300 mg after 4 weeks. The treatment regimen was continued with a dose reduction to 150
mg and longer periods in-between subsequent
injections: third injection after 4 weeks (150 mg)
and fourth injection after 6 weeks (150 mg). After
all four injections, anti-IgE therapy was stopped
owing to a complete remission of urticaria and
angioedema symptoms.

The symptoms recurred after 7 weeks although
they were insignificant and did not require the use
of nsAHs (UAS7, 6). The fifth injection of omalizumab (150 mg) was administered, and the symptoms resolved completely within 2 days as observed
after the first injection. They again recurred after 6
weeks; the sixth dose of omalizumab (150 mg) was
injected, and the symptoms resolved again within 2
days. When they recurred after 5 weeks, the seventh injection (150 mg) was administered. A decision was made to administer omalizumab again if
the symptoms recurred. The regimen was continued with the cycles of omalizumab (150 mg)
administered every 5—6 weeks.

Patient 2

A 23-year-old woman presented with a 1-year history of severe DPU and CSU with angioedema and
severely impaired quality of life. Before the referral to our urticaria clinic, she had been treated with
antihistamines at a dose of up to four-fold higher
than the recommended dose in combination with
CS, but without significant effects. The major issue
in this patient were the symptoms of DPU that limited her daily activities including those in her professional life (use of dental equipment). Prednisone
at a dose of up to 20 mg significantly reduced skin
lesions and angioedema, but it only partly reduced

edema of the hands and feet and did not prevent the
recurrence of symptoms. Higher prednisone doses
resulted in a complete resolution of symptoms but
were badly tolerated by the patient because of more
severe dyspeptic symptoms despite the use of proton-pump inhibitors.

Before starting anti-[gE therapy, the patient’s
total IgE level was 43.86 kU/L.

Similarly to the first case report, already 2 days
after the first injection of omalizumab, all symptoms of DPU and CSU completely resolved, and
the patient was able to resume all activities. She
discontinued all other medications and did not
develop any symptoms of CSU and DPU. After 4
weeks, the second injection of omalizumab (150
mg) was administered.

After two injections, anti-IgE therapy was
stopped because of complete symptom remission,
and a decision was made to restart the therapy if
the symptoms recurred. The patient developed
symptoms of urticaria again after 8 weeks since the
administration of the second dose of omalizumab.
We administered the drug again at a dose of 150
mg and achieved a complete remission within 2
days. After 7 weeks, urticaria manifested itself
again, and the fifth cycle of omalizumab (150 mg)
was administered again with the complete remission of symptoms within a few days. The regimen
was continued with the cycles of omalizumab (150
mg) administered every 7-8 weeks.

Patient 3

A 59-year-old male patient with the symptoms of
severe DPU co-existent with CSU had been ineffectively treated for more than 20 years with antihistamine, anti-inflammatory, immunomodulatory,
and immunosuppressive drugs (sulfasalazine,
histaglobulin, cyclosporine A, dapsone, cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, azathioprine, leukotriene
receptor antagonists, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and CSs). Despite receiving such a regimen, the everyday functioning of the patient was
severely impaired. Severe symptoms of DPU significantly limited his daily activities owing to painful swellings occurring even after light pressure.
During surgery, edema and loosening of stitches
were observed at the site of an incision. The patient
received an additional treatment because of nonviral chronic hepatitis (probably drug-induced),
hypertension, and type 2 diabetes.
Kasperska-Zajac et al.

323

 

At present, his symptoms are only partly controlled by means of a long-term use (more than 10
years) of methylprednisolone at a dose of 16 mg
and fexofenadine at a dose of 180 mg twice daily.
Because none of the previous treatment strategies
had resulted in an improvement of CSU symptoms,
we started omalizumab treatment. After two cycles
of omalizumab at a dose of 300 mg at an interval of
4 weeks, a remission of CSU symptoms was
observed while the symptoms of DPU persisted and,
according to the patient, became even more severe.
The treatment with omalizumab was discontinued.

Patients 4 and 5

A 44-year-old male patient and a 31-year-old
female patient were admitted with severe CSU
and frequently recurring symptoms of angioedema, which could not be controlled with higher
than standard doses of antihistamine drugs and
leukotriene receptor antagonists. To obtain at least
a partial control of symptoms, both patients regularly received prednisone at a dose of 10 mg,
which was increased to 20—40 mg during the periods of more exacerbations. The patients received
four injections of omalizumab (300 mg every 4
weeks) but their symptoms remained uncontrolled.
Therefore, cyclosporine was introduced but the
therapy was discontinued after 1 month because of
adverse effects.

Patients 6, 7, 8, and 9

Four patients aged of 39, 24, 55, and 64 years,
with CSU and angioedema and without remission
on high doses of antihistamine drugs, were admitted to our clinic. They have received a CS (prednisone, up to 15 mg) for the past 3-10 years. We
observed a complete remission of symptoms after
1 dose of omalizumab (300 mg) within 24-48 h.
The regimen was continued with the individual
cycles of omalizumab (150-300 mg) administered
every 5—6 weeks.

Discussion

The cases described above show that both CSU
and DPU with co-existent angioedema can be
quickly and successfully treated with omalizumab
without side effects. Of nine patients, six achieved
a complete control of urticaria and angioedema

after the first injection of omalizumab. Importantly,
six of our patients reported a quick and complete
relief of symptoms within a few days (up to 3
days) after the initial injection. Similar observations were reported previously.!2-'4+ All of those
patients received numerous treatments in the past,
which were either unsuccessful or caused unacceptable side effects.

Efficacy of omalizumab in chronic urticaria

It is now clear that omalizumab therapy allows to
achieve remission, which is particularly important in patients with severe disease activity owing
to distressing symptoms, significantly reduced
quality of life, and adverse effects of previous
treatments, typically a long-term use of CSs or
cyclosporine or both.!!-4

Omalizumab has been shown to be highly effective and to induce clinical remission in 40-83% of
the patients, often within a few days.'!?5 In a large
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial, Kaplan et al.!° demonstrated that approximately half of the patients who received add-on
omalizumab achieved a UAS7 of 6 or lower, and
one-third of the patients were completely free from
itch and hive (UAS7 = 0, denotes a complete resolution of symptoms, which represents the most
desirable outcome). On the other hand, in a retrospective clinical analysis of data from 1250 injections administered over 4 years to 51 patients
treated outside of clinical trials, omalizumab treatment led to a complete remission in 83% of patients
with CSU and 70% of those with induced urticaria,
including 88% of cases with DPU.'? However,
there is still a number of patients who do not benefit from omalizumab treatment. In our case series,
two patients who received omalizumab (300 mg)
every 4 weeks (a total of four doses) did not achieve
remission (measured by UAS and DLQI) and had
to continue the first-line treatment.

Omalizumab therapy: Dosing and regimen

Large controlled trials on the treatment of CSU
showed the efficacy both of 150 mg and 300 mg of
omalizumab administered every 4 weeks.!?.!4!5 It
is still unclear how to reduce the dose and extend
dosing intervals in patients who achieved a complete remission. Apart from the data on the beneficial dosage, there is no standard protocol for the
324 International Journal of Immunopathology and Pharmacology 29(2)

 

dosing intervals and duration of treatment. The
available literature describes algorithms both with
the stable doses of omalizumab administered at
regular intervals as well as those in which dosing
intervals are gradually extended and omalizumab
dose is reduced so that the patient remains asymptomatic during treatment.'3.!6!7 The need for an
individualized approach is emphasized because
patients differ in terms of the clinical course of the
disease and response to treatment.! The individualized approach to the treatment of urticaria with
omalizumab has been proved effective, well-tolerated, more cost-efficient, and more convenient for
the patient.!3-!6 In our practice, we use this regimen with some modifications. Once a complete
response has been achieved, we continue to administer omalizumab on an irregular basis and wait for
hives to reappear. We administer the lowest possible doses (a minimum of 150 mg) at the longest
possible intervals depending on the recurrence of
symptoms.

We observed that the symptoms of chronic urticaria may recur at different time intervals after
consecutive injections. On relapse, the severity of
symptoms is low and does not require the use of
antihistamine drugs in the initial phase. Importantly,
such a regimen does not worsen the patient’s quality of life. In addition, the patient is convinced
about the necessity to take subsequent doses owing
to the recurrence of symptoms. The cost-effectiveness of such a regimen is also important because it
allows to use the therapy in a larger number of
patients.

There are currently no data in the literature suggesting that continuing the treatment with a stable
dose of omalizumab every 4 weeks for a longer
period of time (in a patient with a complete remission) has beneficial effects on the natural course of
the disease and long-term remission after the discontinuation of treatment. Therefore, from the economic and clinical perspectives, it seems rational
to try and extend dosing intervals in all patients
with partial or complete remission.!®

Suggested treatment algorithms based on our
own experience and the available literature

Usually, the starting dose of omalizumab is 150
mg, and if the symptoms resolve completely, the
subsequent dose is administered on symptom
recurrence. In patients with severe symptoms and

a poor response to CS treatment, the starting dose
of omalizumab is 300 mg. If remission is achieved,
a reduced dose of 150 mg is administered after 4
weeks. If remission continues, the next dose is
administered only after the symptoms of urticaria
have recurred. The recurrence of symptoms after a
dose reduction indicates that the dose has to be
increased again to 300 mg. If the remission cannot
be achieved on the 150-mg dose, the dose should
be increased to 300 mg after 4 weeks. If symptoms
persist, the 300-mg dose should be administered
every 4 weeks for 8-12 weeks. If no remission is
observed after that period, the therapy should be
discontinued. In such refractory cases, Metz
et al.!> recommends repeating the 300-mg dose
after 2 weeks.

According to the literature, it is not possible to
reduce the dose from 300 mg to 150 mg or to
extend the dosing interval to longer than 4 weeks
in all patients.'3 This is in line with our findings.
Case 1 described above is notably different from
the other cases in terms of the treatment regimen
because this was our first patient with urticaria and
we had only started to gain our own experience.

Duration of remission during omalizumab
therapy

Symptoms of urticaria usually recur after 4-8
weeks, although longer periods of remission, lasting even a few months, have been described.!3.15.!7

Interestingly, there are reports of immediate and
complete disappearance of severe chronic urticaria
after a single dose of omalizumab.'*

In a study by Metz et al.!3 omalizumab was discontinued every 6—12 months in all patients with a
complete remission to assess disease activity. In
the majority of patients with CSU and induced urticaria, a remission between the last dose of omalizumab and the development of symptoms lasted
from 4 to 8 weeks. On the other hand, one patient
with CSU concomitant with pressure urticaria
remained asymptomatic for 4 months and two
other patients with CSU, for 7 months. Another
two patients with CSU and one patient with mixed
CSU and solar urticaria did not experience a relapse
of symptoms for 4—16 months."

We observed similar findings in our patients; the
symptoms gradually recurred within 4-7 weeks
after the discontinuation of omalizumab. Importantly, the symptoms resolved on the subsequent
Kasperska-Zajac et al.

325

 

administration of omalizumab, which is clinically
significant because patients may experience a few
months without any distressing symptoms or side
effects related to the long-term use of CSs or other
drugs. As an example, one of our female patients
achieved a weight reduction of 4 kg over 3 months
since the discontinuation of CSs. In addition, numerous symptoms related to the long-term treatment of
urticaria resolved, such as drowsiness, depressive
and anxiety disorders, and musculoskeletal disorders. Of note, prior to omalizumab therapy, the
patient continued to experience symptoms despite
the use of'a CS, and other types of therapy, including
the use of cyclosporine, also proved ineffective.

We did not observe any adverse effects of omalizumab in our patients. The safety of this therapy has
also been confirmed by other investigators. !01!.13.1617

Duration of treatment and effect of
omalizumab on the natural course of chronic
urticaria

There are currently no data indicating that a prolonged use of omalizumab has any disease-modifying properties. So far, omalizumab therapy has
been considered as a symptomatic treatment with
symptom recurrence within a few weeks. There
have been reports of patients who have remained
asymptomatic for more than 9 months despite the
discontinuation of treatment.!7 Despite the ongoing follow-up of many of those patients, it is still
unclear whether the remission has been spontaneous, as is frequently observed in the natural course
of urticaria, or whether the drug is particularly
effective in a selected group of patients.

Patient selection for omalizumab treatment

Omalizumab may be effective in the treatment of
difficult-to-treat CSU, such as in patients who did
not achieve a satisfactory control of symptoms with
high-dose antihistamine drugs also in combination
with antileukotriene drugs. These patients usually
require a long-term use of a CS or cyclosporine.
Unfortunately, even such therapy is ineffective in a
number of patients and is associated with significant adverse effects. In addition, the term “difficultto-treat chronic urticaria” covers also a group of
patients who cannot achieve an adequate control of
symptoms using therapies recommended by the
current guidelines owing to side effects, as well as a

group of patients who fear treatments associated
with a risk of severe adverse effects such as a longterm use of CSs or cyclosporine. Omalizumab
(Xolair) is currently approved in Poland for use as a
supportive treatment of CSU in adult patients and
children aged 12 years and older, who do not
respond adequately to treatment with H, antihistamine drugs.

Use of omalizumab in the treatment of delayed
pressure urticaria

DPU and CSU sometimes co-exist in the same
patient. The pathogenesis of DPU is still poorly
understood. This disease is often refractory to conventional treatments including the use of high-dose
nsAHs.

Omalizumab has been described to be useful in
patients with DPU and may be an interesting therapeutic option in refractory cases.' So far, the efficacy of omalizumab in DPU has not been evaluated
in a formal controlled clinical trial. Metz et al.!?
reported that omalizumab was effective in DPU in
all investigated patients (seven patients with a
complete improvement and one patient with a significant improvement). However, the number of
patients with inducible urticaria treated with omalizumab is still too low to draw firm conclusions.!?
Our findings confirm the effectiveness of omalizumab in the treatment of DPU.

The case of a patient with a 20-year history of
DPU should be discussed separately. It is a challenging case owing to the persistence of severe
symptoms. All the treatment modalities described
above were ineffective or had to be discontinued
because of adverse effects. The patient was maintained on medium or, at times, high doses of CSs,
which only partially alleviated the symptoms of
CSU and DPU. After the first administration of
omalizumab, the symptoms of CSU resolved
within a few days, and the patient could walk outside wearing short-sleeved clothing. However,
the symptoms of DPU were not reduced. After the
second administration of omalizumab, the patient
reported the worsening of symptoms, which
required additional doses of CSs. It cannot be
excluded that the aggravation of symptoms was
related to the natural course of the disease because
it was present in the patient’s history, especially
during summer. We decided to discontinue the
treatment because the patient stressed the painful
326 International Journal of Immunopathology and Pharmacology 29(2)

 

symptoms of DPU that had not been alleviated. In
a study by Nam et al.!° 10 patients achieved remission at week 4; four at week 12; three at weeks 8
and 16; and one at weeks 20 and 24 (mean total
period, 9.27 + 6.1 weeks).!° However, because the
patient was not convinced as to the effectiveness
of this treatment, it was discontinued. Currently,
we are monitoring a patient with different types
of chronic urticaria, who achieved a clinical
improvement and could reduce the use of other
drugs (steroid sparing-effect) only after four
cycles of omalizumab (we are currently working
on a case report).

In summary, the use of omalizumab is undoubtedly a beneficial and effective therapy, which
allows to completely resolve the symptoms and
significantly reduce the use of other drugs.

Patients with DPU who do not respond to antihistamine drugs and other therapeutic options
require particular attention.

 

Omalizumab: The mechanism of action in
urticaria

Although the effectiveness of omalizumab has
been studied extensively in chronic urticaria, its
mechanism of action remains unclear. It is particularly interesting that a response to omalizumab treatment is quick and complete, which
has been confirmed not only by our findings but
also those by other authors.!°!'-!3 Considering the
available data on the action of omalizumab along
with the suggestions of various authors, we cannot exclude the IgE-dependent mechanism, at
least in a number of patients with various phenotypes of urticarial.!0.!1.3

Omalizumab binds to circulating IgE, regardless of its specificity, to form IgG—IgE complexes,
which are incapable of binding to IgE receptors.
This process leads to the downregulation of the
high-affinity IgE receptor (FceRI) and reduction
of IgE-mediated response.?°?! Omalizumab causes
a rapid decrease in free IgE levels by 96.1% within
3 days and a slower downregulation of the FceRI
on effector cells.?? It has been demonstrated that
the time course for the decrease of FceRI expression in basophils is faster compared with that in
skin mastocytes, occurring within the maximum
of 7-14 and 70 days, respectively.” Therefore, it
has been suggested that, in IgE-mediated allergic
diseases, omalizumab treatment lasting at least

12-16 weeks is needed before the evaluation of a
clinical benefit.?°

The above mechanism of action explains the
effectiveness of omalizumab in IgE-dependent
allergic diseases, particularly, in moderate-tosevere asthma or rhinitis. However, the high efficacy of omalizumab in various types of urticaria
has not been fully elucidated. In many patients, the
benefit of omalizumab treatment was evident as
early as within the first few days after the initial
dose. This may indicate that there are also other
mechanisms of action present or that a wider range
of various IgE-mediated processes are involved in
the etiopathogenesis of urticaria that have not been
described so far. It may be speculated that the formation of IgE antibodies against environmental
antigens or IgE-mediated sensitization to autoantigens may be involved in the development of
urticarial.3

It has been demonstrated that several autoantigens, which are involved in autoimmune diseases,
result in the production of IgE autoantibodies.”4 In
addition, proteins with a structural similarity to
exogenous allergens may cross-react with allergenspecific IgE antibodies. The IgE-reactive autoantigens might induce IgE-dependent effector cell
degranulation and induce or augment an inflammatory response in the absence of exogenous allergen
exposure.” Interestingly, it has been demonstrated
that patients with CSU express IgE antibodies
against thyroid peroxidase, which could cause
“autoallergic” mast cell activation, a novel pathogenesis of CSU.?°

It has also been demonstrated that the efficacy
of omalizumab in DPU was paralleled by a decrease
in basophil releasability, suggesting that IgE signaling through the basophil may be involved in the
pathogenesis of the disease.?° A rapid improvement
in the symptoms during anti-IgE therapy supports
the hypothesis that DPU and CSU might be mediated by the same IgE-dependent mechanism.

After treatment cessation, free IgE levels return
to baseline about 18-20 weeks after the administration of the last dose in the majority of patients.2”
In theory, this may explain a gradual symptom
recurrence usually 6-8 weeks after the discontinuation of treatment.

Other suggested mechanisms of action of omalizumab include a direct stabilization of effector
cells and anti-inflammatory effect of this drug.!3!4
It has also been proposed that omalizumab may
Kasperska-Zajac et al.

327

 

exert some of its effects through direct basophil
stabilization’? or an immunomodulatory mechanism characterized by a reduction in B-cell activation and changes in tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a,
interleukin (IL)-4, and interferon (IFN)-y synthesis.2 The most recent studies have shown that a
rapid response to omalizumab therapy in chronic
urticaria is more likely to result from the elimination of an activating signal, such as IgE, rather than
from the generation of a negative inhibitory signal.?9 In addition, it has been demonstrated that
omalizumab decreases coagulation activation.
Importantly, the effectiveness of both oral anticoagulants and heparin has been observed in some
patients with refractory CSU.!°

Currently, there are no clear indications on the
possible factors affecting a response in patients
with CSU to the treatment with omalizumab. None
of the available studies have shown any association
between the response to treatment and the baseline
serum IgE levels, the presence of any autoimmune
diseases, age and sex of the patients, duration of
therapy, or other factors.!0!1,15

It would be interesting to assess the response to
omalizumab in the context of the known markers
of CSU severity, including D-dimer.**

Conclusions

Our findings confirm that omalizumab may be an
effective and rapid treatment option in patients
with CSU and DPU accompanied by angioedema
and refractory to treatment with high-dose H, antihistamine drugs. It is important to establish a therapeutic regimen based on the individual patient’s
needs, in which dosing intervals and duration of
the therapy itself are dependent on the type of urticaria. Such an approach might reduce any unnecessary exposure to drugs, adverse drug effects, as
well as healthcare costs.

Declaration of Conflicting Interest

Alicja Kasperska-Zajac was a speaker for Novartis. The
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of
this article.

Funding

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit
sectors.

References

1. Takahagi S, Mihara S, Iwamoto K, et al. (2010)
Coagulation/fibrinolysis and inflammation markers
are associated with disease activity in patients with
chronic urticaria. Allergy 65: 649-656.

2. Kasperska-Zajac A, Grzanka A, Misiolek M, et al.
(2015) Pentraxin-3 as a local inflammatory marker in
chronic spontaneous urticaria. Cytokine 76: 566-568.

3. Asero R, Cugno M and Tedeschi A (2011) Activation
of blood coagulation in plasma from chronic urticaria
patients with negative autologous plasma skin test.
Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology
and Venereology 25: 201-205.

4. Asero R (2015) Plasma D-dimer levels and clinical
response to ciclosporin in severe chronic spontaneous
urticaria. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology
135(5): 1401-1403.

5. Asero R (2013) D-dimer: A biomarker for antihistamine-resistant chronic urticaria. Journal of Allergy
and Clinical Immunology 132: 983-986.

6. Kasperska-Zajac A, Grzanka A, Machura E, et al.
(2013) Analysis of procalcitonin and CRP concentrations in serum of patients with chronic spontaneous
urticaria. Inflammation Research 62: 309-312

7. Kasperska-Zajac A (2011) Does dehydroepiandrosterone influence the expression of urticaria? A mini
review. /nflammation 34: 362-366.

8. Grzanka A, Machura E, Mazur B, et al. (2014)
Relationship between vitamin D status and the inflammatory state in patients with chronic spontaneous urticaria. Journal of Inflammation 11: 2.

9. Kasperska-Zajac A, Grzanka A, Czecior E, et al.
(2013) Acute phase inflammatory markers in patients
with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)induced acute urticaria/angioedema and after aspirin challenge. Journal of the European Academy of
Dermatology and Venereology 27: 1048-1052.

10. Asero R, Pinter E, Marra AM, et al. (2015) Current
challenges and controversies in the management
of chronic spontaneous urticaria. Expert Review of
Clinical Immunology 17: 1-10.

11. Asero R, Tedeschi A and Cugno M (2013) Treatment
of refractory chronic urticaria: Current and future
therapeutic options. American Journal of Clinical
Dermatology 14: 481-488.

12. Maurer M, Rosén K, Hsieh HJ, et al. Omalizumab for
the treatment of chronic idiopathic or spontaneous urticaria. New England Journal of Medicine 368: 924-935.

13. Metz M, Ohanyan T, Church MK, et al. (2014)
Omalizumab is an effective and rapidly acting therapy
in difficult-to-treat chronic urticaria: A retrospective
clinical analysis. Journal of Dermatological Science
73: 57-62.

14. Saini S, Rosen KE, Hsieh HJ, et al. (2011) A randomized, placebo-controlled, dose-ranging study
328

International Journal of Immunopathology and Pharmacology 29(2)

 

15.

16.

17;

18.

19.

20.

21.

of single-dose omalizumab in patients with
H1-antihistamine-refractory chronic idiopathic urticaria. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology
128: 567-573.e1.

Kaplan A, Ledford D, Ashby M, et al. (2013)
Omalizumab in patients with symptomatic chronic
idiopathic/spontaneous urticaria despite standard
combination therapy. Journal of Allergy and Clinical
Immunology 132: 101-109.

Uysal P, Eller E, Mortz CG, et al. (2014) An algorithm
for treating chronic urticaria with omalizumab: Dose
interval should be individualized. Journal of Allergy
and Clinical Immunology 133: 914-915.e2.

Song CH, Stern S, Giruparajah M, et al. (2013) Longterm efficacy of fixed-dose omalizumab for patients

with severe chronic spontaneous urticaria. Annals of

Allergy Asthma & Immunology 110: 113-117.

Asero R, Casalone R and Iemoli E (2014)
Extraordinary response to omalizumab in a child with
severe chronic urticaria. European Annals of Allergy
and Clinical Immunology 46: 41-42.

Nam YH, Kim JH, Jin HJ, et al. (2012) Effects of omalizumab treatment in patients with refractory chronic urticaria. Allergy Asthma & Immunol Research 6: 357-361.
Slavin RG, Ferioli C, Tannenbaum SJ, et al. (2009)
Asthma symptom re-emergence after omalizumab
withdrawal correlates well with increasing IgE and
decreasing pharmacokinetic concentrations. Journal
of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 123: 107-113.
MacGlashan D Jr (2009) Therapeutic efficacy of omalizumab. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology
123: 114-115.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

Lin H, Boesel KM, Griffith DT, et al. (2004)
Omalizumab rapidly decreases nasal allergic response
and FcepsilonRI on basophils. Journal of Allergy and
Clinical Immunology 113: 297-302.

Beck LA, Marcotte GV, MacGlashan D, et al. (2004)
Omalizumab-induced reductions in mast cell Fee
psilon RI expression and function. Journal of Allergy
and Clinical Immunology 114: 527-530.

Valenta R, Mittermann I, Werfel T, et al. (2009)
Linking allergy to autoimmune disease. Trends in
Immunology 30: 109-116.

Altrichter S, Peter HJ, Pisarevskaja D, et al. (2011)
IgE mediated autoallergy against thyroid peroxidase—
a novel pathomechanism of chronic spontaneous urticaria? PLoS One 6: 14794.

Bindslev-Jensen C and Skov PS (2010) Efficacy of
omalizumab in delayed pressure urticaria: A case
report. Allergy 65: 138-139.

Slavin RG, Ferioli C, Tannenbaum SJ, et al. (2009)
Asthma symptom re-emergence after omalizumab
withdrawal correlates well with increasing IgE and
decreasing pharmacokinetic concentrations. Journal
of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 123: 107-113.
Iemoli E, Piconi S, Fusi A, et al. (2010) Immunological
effects of omalizumab in chronic urticaria: A case
report. Journal of Investigative Allergology & Clinical
Immunology 20: 252-254.

Gericke J, Ohanyan T, Church MK, et al. (2015)
Omalizumab may not inhibit mast cell and basophil activation in vitro. Journal of the European
Academy of Dermatology and Venereology 29:
1832-1836.
