 

 

 

Concise report

 

CED

Clinical and Experimental Dermatology

Serial D-dimer plasma levels in a patient with chronic spontaneous
urticaria developing resistance to omalizumab

R. Asero’
‘Allergy Department, Clinica San Carlo, Paderno Dugnano (Ml), Milan, Italy

doi:10.1111/ced.13181

 

Summary

Chronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU) is a condition presenting as the spontaneous

occurrence of itchy weals with or without angio-oedema for > 6 weeks. A patient
with severe chronic spontaneous urticaria who developed resistance to omalizumab
is described. The patient’s D-dimer plasma levels strictly paralleled the disease activity despite the administration of anti-IgE therapy.

 

Chronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU), defined as the
spontaneous occurrence of itchy weals with or without angio-oedema for > 6 weeks, is a rather frequent
disorder that may greatly hamper quality of life for
patients, particularly when it occurs in a severe, antihistamine-resistant form. Previous studies have shown
that severe CSU is frequently associated with increased
D-dimer plasma levels caused by the activation of the
extrinsic pathway of the coagulation cascade, and that
D-dimer levels normalize when the disease goes into
remission.! Further, elevated D-dimer levels are associated with resistance of the disease to antihistamine
therapy. Three double-blind, — placebo-controlled,
phase 3 studies have clearly shown that omalizumab
is highly effective in patients with severe, unremitting
urticaria that does not respond to second-generation
antihistamines at higher than licensed doses.*> The
recently revised European Academy of Allergy and
Clinical Immunology guidelines for the treatment of
CSU place ciclosporin and omalizumab at the same
step of treatment; however, omalizumab is far less
toxic and hence preferable over ciclosporin as a first
therapeutic option in antihistamine-resistant patients,
despite its higher cost.

This report details a patient with severe CSU, who
had only a temporary response to omalizumab and

 

Correspondence: Dr Ricardo Asero, Ambulatorio di Allergologia, Clinica
San Carlo, Via Ospedale 21, 20037 Paderno Dugnano (MI), Milan, Italy
E-mail: r.asero@libero it

Conflict of interest: the authors declare that they have no conflicts of
interest.

Accepted for publication 27 November 2016

© 2017 British Association of Dermatologists

whose D-dimer plasma levels were serially measured
during the different phases of the disease.

Report

A 47-year-old woman presented with a 3-month history of severe generalized urticaria with recurrent
angio-oedema unresponsive to antihistamine treatment (cetirizine) even at higher than licensed doses
(up to 40 mg/day) and only partially and temporarily
responding to oral prednisone 25 mg/day per 5 days.
The patient had a selective IgA deficiency, and baseline in vitro investigations revealed that thyroid
autoantibodies (both anti-thyroglobulin and antithyroperoxidase) were positive, and D-dimer plasma levels
were elevated (3929 ng/mL; normal < 500 ng/mL),
whereas full blood counts, erythrocyte sedimentation
rate, C-reactive protein, antinuclear antibodies and
complement fractions were normal. The patient
reported a slight, inconsistent elevation of thyroidstimulating hormone levels, but other thyroid hormone levels were always normal. A weekly Urticaria
Activity Score (UAS-7) of 38 was calculated from clinical recordings.
Subcutaneous omalizumab 300 mg/month was
started as an add-on treatment to a licensed dose of
cetirizine, and 3 days after the first administration, the
patient reported a dramatic improvement that was
quantified as 98% on a visual analogue scale (corresponding to a UAS-7 of 2). Two weeks after the first
administration of the drug, the patient's D-dimer levels
had dropped to 785 ng/mL. The disappearance of the
CSU persisted after the second dose; 2 weeks after the

Clinical and Experimental Dermatology (2017) 42, pp667-669 667
Serial D-dimer plasma levels in CSU with resistance to omalizumab e R. Asero

4500 40
4000 35
3500 an
3000 =
2500
20
2000
15
1500
1000 10
500 5
° °
Baseline Omalizumab 1 Omalizumab 2 Omalizumab 3 Omalizumab 4

—Ddimer

 

UAS7

Figure 1 Weekly Urticaria Activity Score (UAS-7) and D-dimer
plasma levels at baseline and during omalizumab treatment in a
patient with chronic spontaneous urticaria.

 

administration of the second dose of omalizumab,
D-dimer plasma levels had decreased further to
419 ng/mL. Four weeks after the third omalizumab
dose administration, the patient reported a relapse of
the skin weals, sometimes associated with angiooedema of her face. At this point, D-dimer plasma
levels were 688 ng/mL. The clinical worsening continued after the fourth dose of omalizumab, and was
associated with an increase in D-dimer levels up to
2269 ng/mL and a UAS-7 of 33. The disease severity
and D-dimer plasma levels are summarized in Fig. 1.
At this point omalizumab was stopped, and ciclosporin
4 mg/kg day was prescribed. The effect of this treatment could not be assessed because the patient moved
away and was lost to follow-up.

The pathogenesis of CSU is still debated, but it is
generally accepted that its origin is probably autoimmune in a proportion of cases, and is due to the
presence of functionally active IgG autoantibodies
specific for the high-affinity IgE receptor on mast cells
and basophils, FceRI, or for IgE.* The presence of both
thyroid autoantibodies and selective IgA deficiency, a
condition that is frequently associated with autoimmune disorders, indirectly suggest that our patient
probably had an autoimmune CSU. The patient had
very severe urticaria and showed an excellent initial
response to omalizumab, with virtually complete disappearance of the angio-oedema, weals and pruritus but,
unexpectedly, the effect vanished after 3 months of
treatment.

The mechanism of action of omalizumab in CSU
is still unknown, but it has been suggested that its
efficacy relies on the downregulation of the high-affinity IgE receptor on mast cells and basophils, eventually leading to reduced activation of these cells.*
However, such effects require 3-4 weeks to occur,
whereas the clinical benefit is often visible after as
little as a few days. However, omalizumab has been
reported to exert a number of other effects at

 

668 Clinical and Experimental Dermatology (2017) 42, pp667-669

different levels,° including the coagulation cascade,
eventually resulting in a reduction in D-dimer
plasma levels.”

Development of resistance to omalizumab in a
patients previously responding to the drug has been
reported previously,” but the reasons for this are
unclear. One possible explanation is that the pathomechanisms leading to histamine release in CSU are many,
and that their relative importance may vary from one
patient to another or may change over time in the same
patient. Omalizumab would be able to interfere only
with some, and not all of these. Another interesting
aspect of this case of CSU is that the patient’s D-dimer
levels strictly paralleled the severity of the disease during both the phase of response to omalizumab and the
subsequent phase of omalizumab resistance. This suggests that the reported effects of omalizumab on Ddimer’ levels might not be directly caused by the drug
but could simply reflect the reduction of the general
inflammatory state that accompanies the remission
phases of the disease. Antifibrinolytics such as tranexamic acid have been shown to be effective in some
patients with CSU with elevated D-dimer levels; however, the proportion of patients responding to this drug
is limited, and the therapeutic guidelines do not recommend its use on a routine basis.

In conclusion, this was an unusual case of CSU with
initial response to omalizumab, but later recurrence
while still under treatment. This clinical case confirms
that D-dimer is an excellent marker of disease activity
in a subset of patients with CSU.11°

 

Learning points

+ Resistance to omalizumab may develop in
patients with CSU.

¢ D-dimer strictly parallels disease activity in a
subset of patients with CSU.

¢ The drop in D-dimer levels induced by omalizumab in patients with CSU might not be due by a
direct effect of the drug on the coagulation cascade but might rather reflect the reduction of the
inflammatory state that characterizes the disease.

 

 

 

References

1 Asero R, Tedeschi A, Riboldi P et al. Severe chronic
urticaria is associated with elevated plasma levels of Ddimer. Allergy 2008; 63: 176-80.

© 2017 British Association of Dermatologists
Serial D-dimer plasma levels in CSU with resistance to omalizumab e R. Asero

Asero R. D-dimer: a biomarker for antihistamine-resistant
chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013; 132:
983-6.

Zuberbier T, Maurer M. Omalizumab for the treatment of
chronic urticaria. Expert Rev Clin Immunol 2015; 11:
171-80.

Asero R, Tedeschi A, Marzano AV, Cugno M. Chronic
spontaneous urticaria: immune system, blood
coagulation, and more. Expert Rev Clin Immunol 2016;
12: 229-31.

Chang TW, Chen C, Lin CJP et al. The potential
pharmacologic mechanisms of omalizumab in patients
with chronic spontaneous urticaria. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2015; 135: 337-42.

Asero R, Pinter E, Marra AM, Tedeschi A et al. Current
challenges and controversies in the management of
chronic spontaneous urticaria. Expert Rev Clin Immunol
2015; 11: 1073-82.

© 2017 British Association of Dermatologists

1¢

7 Yalcin AD, Celik B, Gumuslu S. D-dimer levels decreased
in severe allergic asthma and chronic urticaria patients
with the omalizumab treatment. Expert Opin Biol Ther
2014; 14: 283-6.

8 Song CH, Stern S, Giruparajah MP et al. Long-term
efficacy of fixed-dose omalizumab for patients with severe
chronic spontaneous urticaria. Ann Allergy Asthma
Immunol 2013; 110: 113-17.

9 Sussman G, Hebert J, Barron CP et al. Real-life

experiences with omalizumab for the treatment of

chronic urticaria. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2014;

112: 170-4.

Baek YS, Jeon J, Kim JH, Oh CH. Severity of acute and

chronic urticaria correlates with D-dimer level, but not

C-reactive protein or total IgE. Clin Exp Dermatol 2014;

39: 795-800.

Clinical and Experimental Dermatology (2017) 42, pp667-669 669
