Indian Journal of
Dermatology, Venereology & Leprology

Journal indexed with SCI-E, PubMed, and EMBASE
com TEW

EDITORIAL

Management of autoimmune urticaria
Arun C. Inamadar, Aparna Palit

 

 

 

VIEW PONT
Q@osmetic dermatology versus cosmetology: A misnomer in need of urgent correction
Shyam B. Verma, Zoe D. Draelos...

 

 

REVIEW ARTICLE

Psoriasiform dermatoses
Virendra N. Sehgal, Sunil Dogra, Govind Srivastava, Ashok K. Aggarwal.............] nF

 

ORIGNAL ARTICLES

Astudy of allergen-specific IgE antibodies in Indian patients of atopic dermatitis

TS

89

92

Ve RS OMA sss ses csscs ses cpsascssns sasanaeaceaseswastacenas tie acta onee eres aca Waa aaan massa sa eache eae aa chee eee REET 100

Chronic idiopathic urticaria: Comparison of clinical features
with positive autologous serum skin test
George Mamatha, C. Balachandran, Prabhu Smitha...

 

Autologous serum therapy in chronic urticaria: Od wine in anew bottle

105

A. K. Bajaj, Abir Saraswat, Amitabh Upadhyay, Rajetha Damisetty, Sandipan Dhat............1sssssssessessseseesseesseenee 109

Use of patch testing for identifying allergen causing chronic urticaria

JASHiTAV: DED) SHARIN siscxcsesnascsusaeseessesnstonsnecvassunvsetsssy asens evans cnannseuscvansnsasac vesovavanensaia corsa nnepesbusssatsssuanesusisenennccuastes 114

Vitiligoid lichen sclerosus: A reappraisal
Venkae Ratnidin, Atti le Sagi Rirdn Atti... .xcss-scnrossnsnssncnnsecnssenesonavntnansavensivanetenne®

 
CONTENT S (Conta.)

 

BRIEF REPORTS

Activated charcoal and baking soda to reduce odor associated
with extensive blistering disorders

Arun Chakravarthi, C. R. Srinivas, Anil C. Mathew... 122

 

Nevus of Ota: A series of 15 cases
Shanmuga Sekar, Maria Kuruvila, Harsha S. Pai

 

 

Premature ovarian failure due to cyclophosphamide: A report of four cases in dermatology practice
Vikrant A. Saoji.. 128

 

CASE REPORTS
Hand, foot and mouth disease in Nagpur

Viktrantt: As Saf asicassccsssacssascisssussswvsesscaiss css sstssvavectessaunrsssavcansvenstsasciusstesssseosvensveisaniectte 133

Nonfamilial multiple keratoacanthomas in a 70 year-old longterm
non-progressor HI\-seropositive man
Hemanta Kumar Kar, Sunil T. Sabhnani, R. K. Gautam, P. K. Sharma,

Kalpana Solanki, Meenakshi Bhardwaj. 136

 

Late onset isotretinoin resistant acne conglobata in
a patient with acromegaly

Kapil Jain, V. K. Jain, Kamal Aggarwal, Anu Bansal............scsssssssseesessesseees 139

 

Familial dyskeratotic comedones

M. Sendhil Kumaran, Divya Appachu, Elizabeth Jayaseelan........... eee 142

 
CONTENTS (Conta.)

 

   
   

Nasal NK/T cell lymphoma presenting as a lethal midline granuloma
Vandana Mehta, C. Balachandran, Sudha Bhat, V. Geetha, Donald Fernandes...

Childhood sclerodermatomyositis with generalized morphea

 

 

Girishkumar R. Ambade, Rachita S. Dhurat, Nitin Lade, Hemangi R. Jerajani 148

Subcutaneous panniculitistike T-cell cutaneous lymphoma

Avninder Singh, Joginder Kumar, Sujala Kapur, V. Ramesh. 151
LETTERS TOEDITOR

Using a submersible pump to clean large areas of the

body with antiseptics ;

CR. STHMIVAS 0... ese seccsessssseeeeseecesssnueseecessssnseeeeceessnnuteescessennmueeeeesssnuueesseeesennnetteceeessnneeseees ; 154

Peutzeghers syndrome with prominent palmoplantar

pigmentation

K. N. Shivaswamy, A. L. Shyamprasad, T. K. Sumathi, C. Ranganathan 154

Stratum corneum findings as clues to histological diagnosis of

pityriasis lichenoides chronica

Rajiv Joshi .. 156

Author’s reply

Si PEAMCGD NSIT espouse vn rv arses ss enonencoonenrene nna eacnsines ilar TER ee aE RGR 157

Omalizumab in severe chronic urticaria

Ke ViGO0S 6 scscssossessoupevnev anemia ss enone ornare e enn eine reais res ilar eRe eR ATE NEE UUN ER EEE 157

Hypothesis: The potential utility of topical eflornithine against cutaneous leishmaniasis
M. R. Namazi

 

Nodular melanoma in askin graft site scar

A. Gnaneshwar Rao, Kamal K. Jhamnani, Chandana Konda 159

 
CONTENT S (Conta.)

 

Palatal involvement in lepromatous leprosy

 

 

 

 

  

A. Gnaneshwar Rao, Chandana Konda, Kamal Jhamnani 161
Unilateral nevoid telangiectasia with no estrogen and progesterone

receptors in a pediatric patient

FeSuleAfsar; RapipeOrtacs Gull era Dimas cscs cases wine este acsat ona sanon tvs eoenbaaonvannnbendodncen 163
Eruptive lichen planus in a child with celiac disease

Dipankar De), Amrinder ].Kanweal.icisssissscsisscassccveassnssanssssssessevssiwutcsuescinsiveccnsuassieasd 164
Xerosis and pityriasis albalike changes associated with zonisamide

Ferozé Kaliyadan, Jayasree Manoj,'S: Vetikitaktishnan ss scscesssssscsssscsscsssvssvssscvssssseessussservarsecsuseasasnesaroctasvevensisenncctosts 165
Treatment of actinomycetoma with combination of rifampicin

and co-trimoxazole

| ae 166
Author’s reply

M. Ramam, Radhakrishna Bhat, Taru Garg, Vinod K. Sharma, R. Ray, M. K. Singh, U. Banerjee,

€. RajONA va Wsrsscssssssssassssstsscssrvcosscvssncsseatesuesrsceseesiwcsnurasssesroseatstisratisuusssunscevasesssscasabuacste sau NeamEeanAscessTesUSNISS 168
Vitiligo, psoriasis and imiquimod: Fitting all into the same pathway

Bell Raj Eapem.......cssseesssessssssesssssssessesssessseesssssssssnsssessnesssesssessssesessnecsuessussasessessusesessaneeseessessnesanensnsasecsaeennesseeeneesseess 169
Author’s reply

Eipitl Setiel, Deniz SEGKID ccs cescisesss cssrecess ceremintanornms rnin enn ETI 169
Multiple dermatofibromas on face treated with carbon dioxide laser: The importance of laser
parameters

Kabir Sardana, Vijay K. Garg ........sssssssssesssssessssessesssessessssessesssesssssssessecsasessessaessnesssessessnessnssssessusesessanennessssensesseess 170
Author’s reply

D. S. Krupa Shankar, A. Kushalappa, K. S. Uma, Anjay A. Pai.. ze 170
Alopecia areata progressing to totalis/universalis in noninsulin dependent diabetes

mellitus (type II): Failure of dexamethasone-cyclophosphamide pulse therapy

Virendra N. Sehgal, Sambit N. Bhattacharya, Sonal Sharma,

Govind Srivastava, AShok: KiAggatwoalusscsscssescssesesssscsassrscaveavasscaensiceassccestenrsscaseasiesertaaascrinasscceny 171

Subungual exostosis
Kamal Aggarwal, Sanjeev Gupta, Vijay Kumar Jain, Amit Mital, Sumita Gupta ..........sccsssssssssesssessessesseeeseesneess 173
CONTENTS (Conta.)

 

Ginicohistopathological correlation of leprosy
Amish .N. Pandya, Hemiali J Tailor sccsssssssvssisscassensveassrssunnssssvcssevwscesvensvasscesseesscvcsinssasssensaisiitvcinscusensanccsissesseinseswestsies 174

RESIDENT SPAGE

Dermatographism
Dipti Bhute, Bhavana Doshi, Sushil Pande, Sunanda Mahajan, Vidya Kharkar 0... sss eessessessesseeseeseeseesee 177

FOOUS

Mycophenolate mofetil
Ammar’ Surjushe;.D: Gui Saple scssvesscvecsssenvcsansvassvenvssvnssnsonsssusevasssessuvetwasacsveausesesestussevasnsvanssnvosvnvesontusstwssuseoucsevansesssien 180

QUz

Multiple papules on the vulva

G. Raghu Rama Rao, R. Radha Rani, A. Amareswar, P. V. Krishnam

Raju, P. Raja Kumari, Y. Hari Kishan Kumar 185

 

EIDVL
Net Sudy
Qral isotretinoin is as effective as a combination of oral isotretinoin and topical anti-acne
agents in nodulocystic acne
Rajeev Dhir, Neetu P. Gehi, Reetu Agarwal, YUvraj E. MOTE wissiscssescessssssosessosssesoseossonsosvonssusssceseonssnosussssousssssessbsnce 187
Net Case

Qutaneous diphtheria masquerading as a sexually transmitted disease
T. P. Vetrichevvel, Gajanan A. Pise, Kishan Kumar Agrawal,

Devinder:- Mohan Thappabsicissscssssissccsssssreussissssssensvecssrssuansstuveevevassnvestsusssenessnsseavesian 187

 

Net Letters

Patch test in Behcet’s disease
Ulker Giil, Miizeyyen Goniil, Seray Kiilcii Gakmak, ATZU KG ..ssessscssssssssssescseesssseesessecsnnseesseecssnsuessseersnnineteceeeeenene 187
Gerebriform elephantiasis of the vulva following tuberculous
lymphadenitis

Surajit Nayak, Basanti Acharjya, Basanti Devi, Satyadarshi Pattnaik,

Manoj Kimiar Patras sccssisssessssasscssvcissvasssssasssssssscssesrarsssssssnss sausssavtvescenssaiessiiessesestbassastes

   

Net Quiz

Vesicles on the tongue
Saurabh Agarwal, Krishna Gopal, Binay Kumar

 

The copies of the journal to members of the association are sent by ordinary post. The editorial board, association or publisher will not be
responsible for non-receipt of copies. If any of the members wish to receive the copies by registered post or courier, kindly contact the journal's
/ publisher's office. If a copy returns due to incomplete, incorrect or changed address of a member on two consecutive occasions, the names of
such members will be deleted from the mailing list of the journal. Providing complete, correct and up-to-date address is the responsibility of the
members. Copies are sent to subscribers and members directly from the publisher's address; it is illegal to acquire copies from any other source. If
a copy is received for personal use as a member of the association/society, one cannot resale or give-away the copy for commercial or library use.

 
Original Article

 

Autologous serum therapy in chronic urticaria: Old wine in a new
bottle

A. K. Bajaj, Abir Saraswat', Amitabh Upadhyay, Rajetha Damisetty’, Sandipan Dhar*

Bajaj Skin Clinic, Allahabad and *Era’s Lucknow Medical College, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, 7AMRI Hospitals, Kolkata, West Bengal, India

Address for correspondence: Dr. A. K. Bajaj, Bajaj Skin Clinic, 3/6, Panna Lal Road, Allahabad, (UP), India. E-mail: bajajak1945@yahoo.co.in

 

ABSTRACT

Background: Chronic urticaria (CU) is one of the most challenging and frustrating therapeutic problems faced by a
dermatologist. A recent demonstration of abnormal type 1 reactions to intradermal autologous serum injections in some
CU patients has led to the characterization of a new subgroup of “autoimmune chronic urticaria’. This has rekindled
interest in the age-old practice of autologous blood injections as a theoretically sound treatment option in these patients.
Aims: To evaluate the efficacy of repeated autologous serum injections (ASIs) in patients with recalcitrant chronic urticaria.
Methods: A cohort of 62 (32 females) CU patients with a positive autologous serum skin test (ASST) (group 1) was
prospectively analyzed for the efficacy of nine consecutive weekly autologous serum injections with a postintervention
follow-up of 12 weeks. Another group of 13 (seven females) CU patients with negative ASST (group 2) was also treated
similarly. In both groups, six separate parameters of disease severity and activity were recorded. Results: Demographic and
disease variables were comparable in both groups. The mean duration of disease was 1.9 + 0.3 years (range = 3 months
to 32 years) in group 1 and 1.5 + 0.2 years (range = 3 months to 10 years) in group 2. In the ASST (+) group, 35.5%
patients were completely asymptomatic at the end of the follow-up while an additional 24.2% were markedly improved.
In the ASST (—) group, these figures were 23 and 23% respectively. The intergroup difference for complete subsidence
was statistically significant (P < 0.05). In both groups, the most marked reduction was seen in pruritus and antihistamine
use scores followed by the size and frequency of the wheals. Conclusion: Autologous serum therapy is effective in
a significant proportion of ASST (+) patients with CU. A smaller but still substantial number of ASST (—) patients also
benefited from this treatment.

Key Words: Autohemotherapy, Autologous serum injection, Autologous serum skin test, Chronic urticaria

INTRODUCTION

IgE receptor, F.eR,a cause histamine release in a subset
of patients with CU. Subsequent reports established that

Chronic urticaria (CU) is a common and _ distressing
dermatosis characterized by the appearance of evanescent
wheals almost daily, continuously for six or more weeks.
It is a clinical diagnosis and requires that physical, druginduced and infection-related urticaria be ruled out by
thorough history-taking and relevant investigations. Until
recently, all remaining cases were assigned to the rather
inelegant category of chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU) since
no definite cause of CU was known in those cases.

This issue was partially resolved in 1993 when Hide et al..""!
reported that autoantibodies against the high-affinity

27-61%'°| of CU patients, depending on the method of
antibody detection, had these circulating antibodies in their
blood. The simplest screening method to identify this group
of patients having what was termed chronic autoimmune
urticaria (CAU), was found to be the autologous serum
skin test (ASST). Intradermal injection of autologous
serum in these patients elicited an immediate-type wheal
and flare response indicating the presence of a circulating
histamine-releasing factor. These patients with CAU were
reported to have a greater number of wheals with a wider
distribution, more severe pruritus and more frequent
systemic symptoms."!

 

in a new bottle. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol 2008;74:109-13.

 

How to cite this article: Bajaj AK, Saraswat A, Upadhyay A, Damisetty R, Dhar S. Autologous serum therapy in chronic urticaria: Old wine

Received: July, 2007. Accepted: November, 2007. Source of Support: Aventis Pharmaceuticals Limited. Conflict of Interest: Nil.

 

 

Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol | March-April 2008 | Vol 74 | Issue 2

109
Bajaj, et al.: Autologous serum therapy in chronic urticaria

These reports helped explain why some patients with CU
responded well to corticosteroids and immunosuppressive
drugs and poorly to H, antagonists. Recently, Staubach
et al.| reported the efficacy of autologous whole blood
therapy (AWB) in CAU giving weekly intramuscular injections
of whole blood to patients. This mode of treatment was
popular in the treatment of several diseases like atopic
dermatitis, CU! etc earlier but had largely been abandoned
in recent times as being “unscientific”.

We have attempted to refine AWB by removing the cellular
components of blood for intramuscular injections as
histamine-releasing factors are present in the serum. This
should make the treatment less painful for the patients and
easier to administer for the clinician without reducing its
efficacy. We conducted this multicenter, prospective, open
label trial of autologous serum therapy (AST) in patients
with CU and examined its effects on multiple severity
parameters.

METHODS

Patients

Consecutive patients of either sex with chronic urticaria were
assessed for the inclusion criteria of this study, which were:
almost daily appearance of wheals for >6 months, age >18
years and willingness for weekly follow-up and injections.
Exclusion criteria were pregnancy, predominantly physical
urticaria, systemic corticosteroid or immunosuppressive
drug use in the past 6 weeks and other systemic illnesses
requiring treatment. Demographic variables were recorded
and detailed history of disease including history of atopic
disorders was taken. A total of 394 patients with CU were
screened and ASST was done in all. Out of these, 195
(49.5%) were ASST (+) and the rest were ASST (—). After
screening for inclusion and exclusion criteria, 96 ASST (+)
patients were recruited for the study. However, only 62
(64.6%) (32 women, 30 men) completed all nine weekly
intramuscular injections of autologous serum and returned
for at least one posttreatment follow-up 12-16 weeks after

the 9" autologous serum injection. Twenty-eight ASST (—)
patients were also recruited for the study, 13 (46.4%) (seven
women, six men) completed the protocol requirement as
mentioned above.

Autologous serum skin test

Serum was separated by centrifuging patients’ blood at
2000 rpm for 10min and 0.1 ml of autologous serum,
normal saline and histamine (10 g/ml) were injected
intradermally at least 5 cm apart on the volar aspect of
the forearm. A 31-gauge needle was used avoiding sites of
whealing in the past 24 h and results were read at 30 min.
ASST was considered positive when the average of two
perpendicular diameters of the autologous serum wheal
was 21.5 mm more than the normal saline wheal. Longacting antihistamines were withdrawn at least 3 weeks
before and short-acting ones 48 h before testing.

 

Intervention

All baseline disease parameters were recorded after a
week’s run-in period in which patients were allowed to
take a short-acting antihistamine orally (pheniramine
25 mg) only when wheals appeared. Thereafter, every week
for nine consecutive weeks, 5 ml blood was drawn, serum
separated and a 2-ml deep intramuscular injection given
in alternate buttocks or upper arms. Rescue antihistamine
was permitted as in the run-in period; no other drugs were
permitted.

Disease assessment

Six separate parameters of disease activity and severity
were recorded on a 0-3 scale [Table 1] at baseline (0 week),
end of treatment (9 weeks) and follow-up (21-25 weeks).
Based on these, a 0-18 total severity score (TSS) was
generated and overall disease severity classified as clear
(TSS = 0), mild (TSS 1-6), moderate (TSS 7-12) or severe (TSS
13-18). To account for the powerful placebo effect of weekly
injections, we attached less importance to the response
immediately after the 9-week treatment period. A period
(12-16 weeks) longer than the treatment duration was

 

Table 1: Urticaria total severity score

 

 

Parameter Scores

0 2 3
Number of wheals None <10 11-50 >50
Size of wheals None <1cm 1-3 cm >3.cm
Intensity of pruritus None Mild Moderate Severe
Duration of persistence None <th 1-12h >12h
Frequency of appearance None <once or once a week 2-3 times a week Daily/almost daily
Frequency of antihistamine use None <once or once a week 2-3 times a week Daily/almost daily

 

110

Indian JDermatol Venereol Leprol | March-April 2008 | Vol 74 | Issue 2
allowed to elapse before the follow-up assessment was done
to ascertain actual long-lasting improvement/remission. The
main outcome measure was the fall in total severity scores
at the 21-25 week follow-up visit. The secondary outcome
measure was the level of rescue antihistamine use at this
visit compared to the baseline. A follow-up score of 0 at
21-25 weeks was considered complete remission, a score of
1-6 marked improvement, 6-12 moderate improvement and
13-18 poor/no improvement.

Statistical analysis

All statistical analysis was done on the per-protocol
population, i.e., patients completing all nine autologous
serum injections and coming for at least one follow-up visit
12-16 weeks after the last injection. For missing values, the
last observation-carried-forward method was employed.
Nonparametric data was compared by the y? test and
parametric comparisons were done by two-tailed ‘t’ test
and two-way ANOVA. P < 0.05 was fixed as the limit for
significance of differences.

RESULTS

The median age of ASST (+) patients was 25 years
(range 18-64 years); in the ASST (—) group, the median age
was 24 years (range 17-55 years). The duration of urticaria
ranged from 6 months to 32 years (median 2.5 years)
in ASST (+) patients and 6 months to 10 years (median:
3 years) in ASST (—) patients. A positive personal history of
atopy in the form of allergic rhinitis, wheezing or allergic
conjunctivitis was present in 29 (46.7%) ASST (+) and five
(38.5%) ASST (—) patients (x? = 0.58, P = 0.2).

Baseline disease attributes of patients in the two groups are
presented in Table 2. A significantly higher proportion of
ASST (+) patients were classified as severe compared to the
ASST (—) group at baseline (91.9 vs. 69.2%; P = 0.02).

ASST (+) patients had similar mean baseline TSS when

Bajaj, et al.: Autologous serum therapy in chronic urticaria

compared to ASST (—) patients. However, while TSS at the
9" week was significantly lower in the ASST (+) group, it
was not significantly different at the 21-25 week follow-up.

Patients in both groups showed a downward trend in
TSS from baseline to the end of treatment and this fall
was statistically significant in both ASST (+) group (mean
15.5 + 0.2 vs.7.1 + 0.6; P = 0.003) and ASST (—) group (mean
14.1 + 0.2 vs. 10.9 + 0.5; P = 0.008). This trend continued
after the cessation of weekly autologous serum injections
with both groups showing statistically significant falls in
mean TSS from week 9 until final follow-up. Antihistamine
use declined from 100% at baseline in both groups to 38.7%
of ASST (+) patients and 23.1% of ASST (—) patients (P < 0.05)
at the end of the study.

To nullify the effect of varying TSS at baseline, percentage
reductions in TSS were calculated for all patients in both
groups [Figure 1]. Mean percentage reduction in the TSS
was statistically significant at nine weeks and continued
even after the injections were stopped in both groups. The
fall was 54% at the 9" week in ASST (+) patients versus a fall
of only 24% in ASST (—) patients (P = 0.03). Over the next

 

120 4

100 5

 

G ASST +
@ ASST 
60

 

 

 

40 7

 

 

 

 

 

0 T T T 1

Baseline Week9 Week 21-25

 

 

 

Figure 1: Percentage Fall in the total severity score in ASST (+)
and ASST (-) patients with time

 

Table 2: Clinical profile of patients in ASST (+) and ASST (—) groups

 

ASST (+) patients

ASST (-) patients Statistical significance*

 

Number of wheals (scores) range 0-3 2440.1 2440.2 ns.
Size of wheals (scores) range 0-3 2.840.1 2740.4 ns.
Intensity of pruritus (scores) range 0-3 2.7401 2.9+0.1 ns.
Duration of persistence (scores) range 0-3 2220.4 1940.2 ns.
Frequency of appearance (scores) range 0-3 2.9+0.1 2.9+0.1 ns.
Frequency of antihistamine use (scores) range 0-3 2.940.1 2.9+0.1 ns.
Total severity score (TSS) range 0-18 15.5 + 0.2 14.140.8 ns.

 

All figures are mean + SE; n.s. - not significant, “Significant difference between groups, ASST - Autologous serum skin test

Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol | March-April 2008 | Vol 74 | Issue 2

111
Bajaj, et al.: Autologous serum therapy in chronic urticaria

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

100 ASST (4) & ASST.)
Baseline

20 90 i
Follow up

* 80

7. 0

@ 60

ia 50

#. 40

30 30

20 20

10 10

ol ol

Clear Mild Moderate” Severe Clear Mild" Moderate’ Severe

 

 

 

Figure 2: Proportion of patients with different severity grades at
baseline and follow-up in the two groups

12-16 weeks, it continued to show a further downward
trend in both groups and the final reduction was 65% in
ASST (+) and 53% in ASST (—) patients (P > 0.05). At 9 weeks,
a decline from the baseline achieved statistical significance
in all parameters in the ASST (+) group and in all except
the wheal number (P = 0.13) and duration of persistence
(P = 0.16) in ASST (—) group. In the initial visit, there were
no patients in the clear or mild severity grades in either
group [Figure 2]. However, at the final follow-up visit, 35.5%
patients were completely clear and 24.2% had only mild
disease in the ASST (+) group. These figures were 23 and
23% respectively in the ASST (—) group.

DISCUSSION

The aim of the present study was to evaluate the efficacy of

autologous serum therapy (AST) in chronic urticaria of more

than 6-month duration. We chose to use autologous serum
in place of whole blood for the following reasons:

1. The circulating autoreactive factor is present in the
serum, not in the cellular components of blood.

2. Finer needles can be used for injecting serum
compared to those with whole blood, reducing
patient discomfort and increasing compliance.

3. Whole blood must be injected as quickly as possible
after being drawn to avoid the possibility of clotting,
requiring increased patient co-operation.

Contrary to a previous report, our experience has shown
that AST was an effective treatment even in some ASST (-)
patients. Similar to most previous reports in CU patients,?“!
almost half of the patients in this study (195 of 394, 49.5%)
had a positive reaction to autologous serum. However,
our figure was lower than that reported by Godse"!
from Mumbai. Demographic and historical parameters
were similar in both groups. Although none of the the
intergroup differences in the scores of all six severity
parameters (lesion size, number, frequency, persistence,
itch and antihistamine use) were statistically significant,

112

there was a clear distinction when patients were stratified
into mild, moderate and severe categories based on the
total severity score (TSS). A significantly larger number of
patients in the ASST (+) group were graded as “severe”
than the ASST (—) group (P = 0.02). In 1999, Sabroe et al.'*
reported that ASST (+) patients had more widespread
lesions and significantly more severe pruritus and systemic
symptoms. However, other reports have revealed no !"" or
only subtle differences in the symptomatology of ASST (+)
and ASST (—) patients - slightly longer disease duration
and higher antihistamine use."

AST was well-tolerated and none of the patients reported
any side effects except local soreness lasting from 12 to
24h. We did not notice any bruising at injection sites
although it was reported in some patients given autologous
whole blood injections for CU in a prior study."!

Staubach et al.'’! performed follow-up evaluation 4 weeks
after the last (8°) injection using autologous whole blood in
their study. We specifically chose a 3-4 times longer followup duration than Staubach and co-workers did to accurately
assess the longevity of the suppressive effect of this form
of treatment.

Our results indicate that almost 60% of ASST (+) patients
show a significant improvement in their signs and symptoms
after nine weekly ASIs are given [Figure 1]. This is slightly
lower than the figure of 70% reported by Staubach et al.'*!
However, the two studies are not easily comparable since
they used a somewhat different scoring system and the
average disease severity and duration in their patients were
significantly lower than in this study.

More importantly, we have shown that improvement is
sustained for at least 3-4 months after the last injection. The
most gratifying response has been seen in 35% of ASST (+)
and surprisingly, 23% of ASST (—) patients who have cleared
completely and have not relapsed for 12-16 weeks after the
last ASI. In fact, six patients who had complete clearance
with ASI have continued to follow up for more than 2 years
and have remained asymptomatic. After 12 and 18 months,
two of them have relapsed and have been given booster
ASIs to which they have responded again (data not shown).

Mean percentage reductions in TSS data [Figure 2] clearly
show that there was a faster and more dramatic decline
in severity in the ASST (+) group during the treatment
phase. This trend continued for the next 12-18 weeks and
ASST (+) scores were still lower than the ASST (—) scores
at the final 21-25 week follow-up. However, the difference

Indian JDermatol Venereol Leprol | March-April 2008 | Vol 74 | Issue 2
was statistically not significant at this point (65 vs. 43%,
P>0.05). In comparison, Staubach et al.! reported
significant reduction only in ASST (+) patients (41%) while
ASST (—) patients showed only a 21% fall in severity scores,
which was not different from the placebo group.

Since we do not know exactly how AST works, we can
only surmise as to the mechanisms behind the significant
improvement in almost half of all ASST (—) patients in our
study. The first factor is the relatively crude nature of ASST.
Bradykinin is released when serum is separated and the
complement factor C, gets activated to C,,. Both can cause
false positive immediate type reactions. Moreover, there
is a poor concordance of ASST positivity with circulating
antibodies to IgE or FR,a. Reported rates of ASST (+)
patients actually having antiF ¢R,a antibodies vary from 40!""!
to <20%.'§! This means that most of the patients who react
to ASST do not have circulating antiF €R,a/lgE antibodies.
On the other hand, while initial studies reported <2%
antiF Ra positivity in ASST (—) patients,!""! recent studies
have detected these antibodies in as many ASST (—) patients
as ASST (+) ones®! and even in healthy controls.!'? Matters
are further complicated by the different methods employed
to detect antiF.€R,a antibodies with immunoblotting being
less sensitive than histamine release assays.

Obviously, it is far from clear which circulating factor is
identified by a positive ASST. It is quite likely that ASST
positivity reflects an autoreactive state to several different
circulating factors in the patients’ own blood. False negative
results in ASST may partly explain the good response to ASI
seen in ASST (—) CU patients in this study.

A significant drawback of this study was its uncontrolled
and unblinded nature. We did not choose to use a placebo
arm in this study since we chose severely affected patients.
A larger placebo-controlled study with unselected CIU
patients is warranted to assess the utility of this therapy in
our patients.

To conclude, we have demonstrated that the old wine of
autohemotherapy is still potent when served in a new bottle
as autologous serum injection therapy, and still retains its
attraction for physicians and patients alike. We however, do
not know exactly how or when it works but it may prove to
be a cheap, effective and potentially curative modality in
some patients with recalcitrant chronic urticaria. Autologous
serum skin test reactivity may not reliably reflect the chances
of response to this form of therapy and many ASST-negative

Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol | March-April 2008 | Vol 74 | Issue 2

Bajaj, et al.: Autologous serum therapy in chronic urticaria
patients may also be benefited by this treatment.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work was funded in part by Aventis Pharmaceuticals
Limited.

REFERENCES

1. Hide M, Francis DM, Grattan CE, Hakimi J, Kochan JP,
Greaves MW. Autoantibodies against the high affinity IgE
receptor as a cause of histamine release in chronic urticaria.
N Engl J Med 1993:328:1599-604.

2. Godse KV. Autologous serum skin test in chronic idiopathic
urticaria. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol 2004;70:283-4.

3. Fiebiger E, Maurer D, Holub H, Reininger B, Hartmann G,
Woisetschlager M, et al. Serum IgG autoantibodies directed
against the alpha chain of Fc epsilon RI: A selective marker
and pathogenetic factor for a distinct subset of chronic
urticaria patients? J Clin Invest 1995:96:2606-12.

4. Ferrer M, Kinet JP, Kaplan AP. Comparative studies of functional
and binding assays for IgG anti Fc epsilon Ria (a-subunit) in
chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1998;101:672-8.

5. Piconi S, Trabattoni D, lemoli E, Fusi ML, Villa ML, Milazzo F,
et al. Immune profiles of patients with chronic idiopathic
urticaria. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 2002;128:59-66.

6. Sabroe RA, Grattan CE, Francis DM, Barr RM, Kobza Black A,
Greaves MW. The autologous serum skin test: A screening
test for autoantibodies in chronic idiopathic urticaria. Br J
Dermatol 1999;140:446-52.

7. Sabroe RA, Seed PT, Francis DM, Barr RM, Kobza Black A,
Greaves MW. Chronic idiopathic urticaria: Comparison of the
clinical features of patients with and without anti- Fe epsilon
RI or ani IgE antibodies. J Am Acad Dermatol 1999;40:
443-50.

8. Staubach P, Onnen K, Vonend A, Metz M, Siebenhaar F,
Tschentscher I, et al. Autologous whole blood injections to
patients with chronic urticaria and a positive autologous
serum skin test: A placebo-controlled trial. Dermatology
2006;212:150-9.

9. Bocci V. Autohaemotherapy after treatment of blood with
ozone: A reappraisal. J Int Med Res 1994;22:131-44.

10. Nettis E, Dambra P, D’Oronzio L, Cavallo E, Loria MP,
Fanelli M, et al. Reactivity to autologous serum skin test
and clinical features in chronic idiopathic urticaria. Clin Exp
Dermatol 2002;27:29-31.

11. Niimi N, Francis DM, Kermani F, O’Donnell BF, Hide M, KobzaBlack A, et al. Dermal mast cell activation by autoantibodies
against the high affinity IgE receptor in chronic urticaria. J
Invest Dermatol 1996;106:1001-6.

12. Horn MP, Gerster T, Ochensberger B, Derer T, Kricek F, Jouvin
MH, et al. Human anti-Fc- epsilon RI alpha autoantibodies
isolated from healthy donors cross-react with tetanus
toxoid. Eur J Immunol 1999;29:1139-48.

113
