 

Coagulation cascade and fibrinolysis in patients
with multiple-drug allergy syndrome

Riccardo Asero, MD*; Alberto Tedeschi, MD+; Piersandro Riboldi, MD#§; Samantha Griffini, PhD§
Erika Bonanni, PhD§}|; and Massimo Cugno, MD§||

 

 

>

 

 

Background: Previous studies have shown that patients with multiple-drug allergy syndrome (MDAS) frequently have
positive autologous serum skin test results, similar to patients with chronic urticaria (CU). Recent investigations have found that
patients with CU show signs of thrombin generation and activation of the tissue factor pathway of the coagulation cascade.

Objective: To study thrombin generation and fibrinolysis in patients with MDAS.

Methods: Nine patients with MDAS underwent autologous plasma skin testing (APST) and measurement of plasma
prothrombin fragment F, , , and D-dimer levels. Furthermore, the basophil histamine-releasing activity of plasma from patients
with MDAS was evaluated. Plasma samples from 74 healthy control subjects and 13 patients with CU were used as negative and
positive controls, respectively.

Results: All 9 patients with MDAS had positive APST results, and 7 showed elevated plasma levels of fragment F, 5. In
patients with MDAS, the median F, , , level (339 pmol/L; interquartile range [IQR], 250-401 pmol/L) significantly exceeded
that in healthy controls (159 pmol/L; IQR, 123-196 pmol/L) (P = .001) but did not significantly differ from that in controls with
CU (292 pmol/L; IQR, 182-564 pmol/L; P = .38). Plasma D-dimer levels were normal in all the patients with MDAS and were
significantly lower than in controls with CU (P = .009). Finally, the histamine-releasing activity of plasma from patients with
MDAS was significantly increased and correlated with F, ,, levels (r = 0.68; P = .04).

Conclusion: Positive APST results and thrombin generation indicate a common physiopathologic background in MDAS and

CU. The lower D-dimer levels suggest that fibrinolysis occurs less intensely in MDAS than in CU.

INTRODUCTION

The so-called multiple-drug allergy syndrome (MDAS) is a
clinical condition characterized by a propensity to react
against different, chemically unrelated drugs. The most frequent causes of MDAS are antibacterial drugs! and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs,*> but other drug classes may
be involved in this condition as well. In our experience, in
most instances the syndrome presents clinically as acute
urticaria with or without angioedema after administration of
the offending compounds, but different immediate-type or
delayed-type rashes, including Stevens-Johnson syndrome,
anaphylaxis, serum sickness—like reactions, and immune cytopenias, have also been reported. Because, except for some
cases of positive skin and serologic reactivity to penicillin
reagents, in patients with MDAS results of skin tests with the
offending compounds and specific antibody determinations
are negative, and reactions may occur after the first admin
Affiliations: * Ambulatorio di Allergologia, Clinica San Carlo, Paderno
Dugnano (MI), Italy; + Unita Operativa di Allergologia e Immunologia
Clinica, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Fondazione IRCCS, Milano, Italy; + Unita di Allergologia, Immunologia Clinica e
Reumatologia, IRCCS to Auxologico, Milano, Italy; § Dipartimento di
Medicina Interna, Universita di Milano, Milano, Italy; || Unita Operativa di
Medicina Interna 2, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina
Elena, Fondazione IRCCS, Milano, Italy.

Disclosure: Authors have nothing to disclose.

Received for publication May 18, 2007; Received in revised form June
14, 2007; Accepted for publication June 25, 2007.

  
  

Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2008;100:44—-48.

istration of a certain drug class, most of these adverse drug
reactions must be regarded as pseudoallergic. Patients with
MDAS are frequently otherwise healthy and do not have a
history of spontaneous rashes or an increased prevalence of a
personal or familial history of atopic diseases and do not
show any identifiable underlying disease. In most cases
MDAS is diagnosed on the basis of clinical history or the
direct observation of adverse reactions to 1 or more drugs
other than those reported as offending by history during oral
tolerance tests.

The pathogenic mechanisms underlying MDAS are still
unclear; however, recent studies have found that patients with
this disorder frequently show a wheal-and-flare reaction on
intradermal injection of autologous serum (autologous serum
skin test [ASST]).° The ASST has been used for approximately 2 decades as a means to detect autoreactivity (ie, the
presence of circulating histamine-releasing factors) in patients with chronic urticaria (CU).’ The presence of circulating autoantibodies to the high-affinity IgE receptor (FceRI)
or to IgE has been firmly demonstrated® in patients with CU,
and positive ASST results have been ascribed to their presence in approximately one-third of patients.’ In the remaining
cases the exact nature of histamine-releasing factors involved
in skin reactivity to autologous serum is still debated, and
IgG-depleted sera from patients with CU maintain the ability
to induce a wheal-and-flare reaction on intradermal injection.'° Recently, we found that in patients with CU the intradermal injection of autologous plasma anticoagulated with

44

ANNALS OF ALLERGY, ASTHMA & IMMUNOLOGY
sodium citrate (autologous plasma skin test [APST]) scores
positive in approximately 90% of patients (vs approximately
50% of ASST).!! This observation suggested a possible role
of factors much more abundantly present in plasma than in
serum in the wheal-and-flare reactions induced by autologous
plasma. In effect, when we studied the clotting cascade in
these patients we demonstrated that thrombin generation occurs in patients with CU, as shown by significantly elevated
plasma levels of prothrombin fragment F, , 5. Such fragment
is a polypeptide of approximately 34 kDa that is released into
the circulation during the activation of prothrombin to thrombin by factor Xa.!? In subsequent experiments we found that
thrombin generation results from activation of the tissue
factor pathway of the coagulation cascade.'* The putative role
of thrombin is suggested by experimental animal models,
where thrombin induces edema through an increase in vascular permeability,!*'> which can be obtained by a direct
effect of thrombin on endothelial cells!® and indirectly by a
thrombin-related release of inflammatory mediators, an effect
that is reduced by antihistamines and totally abolished if mast
cell granules are depleted.'> Furthermore, thrombin triggers
mast cell degranulation!” and may activate protease-activated
receptor | on mast cells.'* Finally, thrombin can generate C5a
in the absence of C3, thus bypassing the whole first part of
the complement cascade.'? Nonetheless, direct evidence that
thrombin is a histamine-releasing factor in humans is still
lacking. Based on these observations, we looked for signs of
thrombin generation and studied the coagulation cascade in
patients with MDAS.

PATIENTS AND METHODS

Patients

This study was conducted on 9 consecutive women with
MDAS (mean age, 50.1 years; age range, 36-76 years). The
MDAS was diagnosed in the presence of an unequivocal
history of multiple acute urticaria episodes after exposure to
chemically unrelated drugs or, alternatively, if acute urticaria
developed during oral tolerance tests with alternative substances in individuals with a history of single-drug—induced
urticaria. The clinical features of the study patients are sum
marized in Table 1. Six patients had a clinical history of
multiple-drug intolerance, and 3 had a history of single-drug
intolerance, with positive oral tolerance test results for alternative substances. Offending drugs induced acute urticaria in
all cases. Reported offending drugs included amoxicillin (n =
8), macrolides (n = 3), quinolones (n = 2), nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (n = 2), sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim, doxycycline, gentamicin, and metoclopramide
(n = | each). No patient had a history of CU or of spontaneous whealing. Three patients were atopic and had respiratory allergy, as shown by clinical history and positive skin
prick test reactions to a large panel of seasonal and perennial
airborne allergens. The study protocol conformed to the ethical guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the local ethical committee. All the participants
gave written informed consent before enrollment.

Oral Tolerance Tests

Based on clinical history, all the patients underwent singleblind, placebo-controlled oral tolerance tests with alternative
substances at San Carlo Clinic, as previously described.* In
all cases, only the appearance of frank urticaria with or
without angioedema was considered to be a positive reaction.
All the patients (except 1 with a history of multiple-drug
intolerance) did not tolerate at least 1 of the alternative
antibiotics tested on oral challenge tests, and | patient did not
tolerate aspirin either (Table 1). At the end of the oral
challenge sessions all the patients fulfilled the diagnostic
criteria for MDAS; at least 1 safe alternative antibiotic was
detected in 7 patients, whereas 2 tolerated alternative drugs
only while taking an antihistamine (cetirizine, 10 mg/d, in
both cases).

Skin Tests

The APST was performed in all 9 patients with MDAS; 5 of
these patients also underwent ASST. Intradermal tests were
performed as previously described.'! A skin prick test with
histamine, 10 mg/mL, and an intradermal test with 0.05 mL
of saline were used as positive and negative controls, respectively. Ten individuals with allergic rhinitis and 5 with contact dermatitis underwent APST as controls.

Table 1. Clinical Features of 9 Women With Multiple-Drug Allergy Syndrome

 

 

Patient No. Patient age, y APST results ASST results History Intolerance (challenge) Tolerance (challenge)

1 42 4+ 4+ A Cc D, Cip

2 57 3+ Negative A, D, NSAIDs Cip, C, S Only with a-H,

3 46 4+ Negative S,N Cip A,C

4 63 3+ Negative Cc A, S, D, ASA Cip

5 76 3+ 3+ A C, Cip Lin, D

6 4 4+ ND A, C,M None Cip, D

7 49 4+ ND A, Cip c,D Ss

8 4 3+ ND A,G,E D Cip

9 36 4+ ND A, Lo c,s D, C (with a-H,)

 

Abbreviations: A, amoxicillin; a-H;, antihistamine; APST, autologous plasma skin test; ASA, aspirin; ASST, autologous serum skin test; D,
doxycycline; C, clarithromycin; Cip, ciprofloxacin; E, erythromycin; Lin, lincomycin; Lo, lomefloxacin; M, metoclopramide; N, naproxen; ND, not
determined; NSAIDs, several nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; S, sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim.

VOLUME 100, JANUARY, 2008

45
Fragment F, , » and D-Dimer Measurement

Fragment F,; ,, was measured in sodium citrate—anticoagulated plasma samples by means of a sandwich enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (Enzygnost F, , »; Behring Diagnostics
GmbH, Frankfurt, Germany). Intra-assay and interassay coefficients of variation were 5% and 8%, respectively. Ddimer was measured in sodium citrate—anticoagulated plasma
samples by means of enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(Zymutest D-dimer; Hyphen BioMed, Neuville sur Oise,
France) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The
intra-assay and interassay coefficients of variation were 10%
and 15%, respectively. Plasma levels less than 229 pmol/L
and less than 4.00 nmol/L were considered normal for fragment F, . , and D-dimer, respectively. Plasma samples from
74 healthy controls and from 13 patients with CU were used
as negative and positive controls, respectively.

Basophil Histamine-Release Assay

Leukocyte suspensions from healthy blood donors were prepared by means of dextran sedimentation of peripheral venous blood, anticoagulated with 0.01M EDTA, and mixed
with 6% dextran in saline solution (Plander 70; Fresenius
Kabi Italia, Isola della Scala, Verona, Italy) and 30-mmol/L
dextrose (Sigma-Aldrich Corp, St Louis, Missouri). The cells
were allowed to settle for 60 to 90 minutes at room temperature. Then, leukocyte-rich plasma was aspirated and centrifuged at 300g for 15 minutes at 4°C, and the cell button was
washed twice in Tyrode buffer, pH 7.4, containing 140mM
sodium chloride, 5.5mM dextrose, 2.7mM potassium chloride, 0.36mM sodium dihydrogen phosphate, and 12mM sodium bicarbonate. Leukocytes (with approximately 7 x 10*
basophils) were then resuspended in a 100-uwL volume of
Tyrode buffer with 1.8-mmol/L calcium chloride and 0.5mmol/L magnesium chloride and incubated with 100 wL of
the serum under examination, making a final volume of 200
pL. After incubation for 40 minutes at 37°C, the reaction was
stopped by the addition of 800 jL of ice-cold buffer solution
and centrifugation at 1,000g for 10 minutes at 4°C. After
centrifugation, the supernatants were aspirated, mixed with
an equal volume of perchloric acid, 6%, and centrifuged at
1,000g for 10 minutes at 4°C. Histamine concentration in the
supernatants was measured using an automated fluorometric
method, according to the method of Ruff et al.?° Spontaneous
histamine release was evaluated by measuring histamine concentration in the supernatant of unstimulated cells incubated
for 40 minutes at 37°C. Total histamine content was obtained
by adding 100 pL of perchloric acid, 6%, to 100 mL of cell
suspension. Net histamine release was calculated as the percentage of total histamine content after subtraction of spontaneous release. A 5% release cutoff value was used. Plasma
samples were tested using leukocyte suspensions from 3
healthy donors whose basophils were previously shown to
release 30% of total histamine content on challenge with an
optimal dose of goat polyclonal anti-human IgE (SigmaAldrich Corp), 10 wg/mL. One assay per plasma sample was
performed to detect histamine-releasing activity. Histamine
release assay was performed using the same plasma samples
used for APST.

RESULTS

Skin Tests

Results of APST were positive in all 9 patients with MDAS,
and results of ASST were positive in 2 of 5 patients with
MDAS (Table 1); saline did not induce any skin reaction in
any patients with MDAS. No skin reactivity on APST was
observed in the 15 controls.

Fragment F, ., and D-Dimer Measurement
Fragment F,,, plasma levels in patients and controls are
shown in Figure 1. In patients with MDAS, the median F, , 5
level (339 pmol/L; interquartile range [IQR], 250-401
pmol/L) was significantly higher than in healthy controls
(159 pmol/L; IQR, 123-196 pmol/L) (P = .001) but not
significantly different from controls with CU (292 pmol/L;
IQR, 182-564 pmol/L; P = .38). Fragment F, ,, plasma
levels were clearly elevated in 7 of 9 patients (78%) (Fig 1).
D-dimer plasma levels in patients and controls are shown
in Figure 2. In patients with MDAS, the median D-dimer
plasma level (1.19 nmol/L; IQR, 1.01-1.44 nmol/L) did not
differ from that in healthy controls (1.42 nmol/L; IQR, 0.96—
1.63 nmol/L) but was significantly lower than in controls

 

p= 0.0001
3000 p= 0.0001 °
2000

1000 °

a
e
S

F1+2 (pmol /L)
$
r—)

200

 

MDAS cu

Figure 1. Plasma levels of prothrombin fragment F, , , in healthy control
subjects, patients with multiple-drug allergy syndrome (MDAS), and controls with chronic urticaria (CU). Horizontal lines represent median values;
white circles, individual participant values. The F; ,, plasma levels were
higher in patients with MDAS and in those with CU than in healthy controls.

Controls

46

ANNALS OF ALLERGY, ASTHMA & IMMUNOLOGY
 

 

 

 

 

p= 0.0001
p= 0.009 |
7,00 4 |
600 4 °
8
=> 5004
2 °
°
E 400 4 °
ry fe)
FS 3,00 |
a ———
ce)
T T T
Controls MDAS cu

Figure 2. Plasma levels of D-dimer in healthy control subjects, patients
with multiple-drug allergy syndrome (MDAS), and controls with chronic
urticaria (CU). Horizontal lines represent median values; white circles,
individual participant values. D-dimer plasma levels were higher in patients
with CU, but not in patients with MDAS, than in healthy controls.

with CU (2.67 nmol/L; IQR, 1.22-5.00 nmol/L) (P = .009).
No patient with MDAS showed elevated D-dimer levels (Fig
2).

Basophil Histamine-Release Assay

Plasma samples from 5 of 9 patients with MDAS (56%), 4 of
13 controls with CU (31%), and O of 20 healthy controls
induced significant histamine release (P = .001 for patients
with MDAS vs healthy controls) (Fig 3). In patients with
MDAS, plasma histamine-releasing activity was significantly
correlated with plasma F, ,, levels (r = 0.68; P = .04) but
not with D-dimer levels.

DISCUSSION

One previous study® already showed that MDAS and CU
share a high prevalence of positive ASST results. Thus, based
on our recent experience in patients with CU'> demonstrating that patients with this condition show signs of thrombin
generation, we hypothesized that patients with MDAS might
show the same disorders and performed APST and plasma
F, ., prothrombin fragment and D-dimer measurements in
patients diagnosed as having MDAS on the basis of clinical
history and oral tolerance tests with alternative drugs. The
findings fully confirmed the preliminary hypothesis in that,
similar to patients with CU, all the patients with MDAS had

p= 0.0001

 

 

 

 

sap p= 0.0001
8
20.0 4 °
SS
2 °
§ 15.0 4
: 8
2 8
€ 1004
sS
2
= 8
5.0 4 ——
3 8 =e
0.0 4 cece Semcces— food a
T T T
Controls MDAS cu

Figure 3. Histamine-releasing activity in serum samples from healthy
control subjects, patients with multiple-drug allergy syndrome (MDAS), and
controls with chronic urticaria (CU). Results are expressed as net percentage
of histamine release from basophils of a healthy donor. Horizontal lines
represent median values; white circles, individual participant values. Serum
histamine-releasing activity was significantly higher in patients with MDAS
and in controls with CU than in healthy controls.

positive APST results and showed signs of thrombin generation in most cases, as demonstrated by the significant increase in fragment F, , , plasma levels. As a difference from
patients with CU,!° particularly those with severe disease,”!
D-dimer levels were normal in all 9 patients with MDAS.

Data on human cutaneous mast cells are still missing.
However, in animal models, thrombin, an enzyme, increases
the permeability of blood vessels,'*-!° induces mast cell degranulation,'’ and may activate protease-activated receptor |
on mast cells.'® The effects of thrombin on vascular permeability are reduced by antihistamines and are totally abolished
if mast cell granules are depleted.'> Recent studies!’ also
showed that thrombin can generate CSa in the absence of C3,
thus bypassing the entire first part of the complement cascade. In patients with CU, C5a has been shown to amplify
IgG-dependent histamine release from basophils.?? Serum
histamine-releasing activity was significantly higher in patients with MDAS than in healthy controls, suggesting that
these patients have circulating histamine-releasing factors
similar to patients with CU. In addition, the positive correlation between F, , , plasma levels and serum histamine-releasing activity indicates that activation of the coagulation cascade and serum capacity to induce histamine release are
parallel and probably interrelated phenomena in patients with
MDAS.

VOLUME 100, JANUARY, 2008

47
 

Based on results from a small group, patients with MDAS
seem to have a condition similar to a “latent” form of CU that
is not sufficiently active to cause spontaneous wheals or
angioedema but is nonspecifically triggered by exposure to
chemically unrelated drugs, possibly via a direct histaminereleasing effect of drugs on mast cells and basophils. Mast
cells and basophils of patients with MDAS might be in a
“preactivated” (ie, particularly prone to degranulate) state at
the time when the offending drug is taken; drugs would act as
a final trigger for degranulation followed by acute urticaria.
The fact that all the patients with MDAS showed normal
D-dimer levels suggests that in this condition, activation of
the coagulation cascade and fibrinolysis occur at a lower level
than in patients with spontaneous CU. In effect, in previous
studies!'!> we demonstrated that the severity of spontaneous
urticaria is associated with the degree of activation of the
extrinsic pathway of coagulation. In conclusion, the currently
available data suggest that patients with MDAS and those
with CU show activation of the coagulation cascade, although
the former at a lower level and without fibrinolysis. Further
studies on larger groups of patients with MDAS are warranted to confirm the present findings.

REFERENCES

1. Smith JW, Johnson JE, Cluff LE. Studies of the epidemiology of adverse
drug reactions, II: an evaluation of penicillin allergy. N Engl J Med.
1966;274:998 -1002.

2. Sullivan TJ, Ong RL, Gilliam LK. Studies of the multiple drug allergy
syndrome [abstract]. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1988;83:270.

3. Moseley EK, Sullivan TJ. Allergy reactions to antimicrobial drug in
patients with a history of prior drug allergy [abstract]. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 1991;87:226.

4. Asero R. Detection of patients with multiple drug allergy syndrome by
elective tolerance tests. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 1998;80:
185-188.

5. Asero R. Multiple drug allergy syndrome: a distinct clinical entity. Curr
Allergy Asthma Rep. 2001;1:18-22.

6. Asero R, Tedeschi A, Lorini M, Caldironi G, Barocci F. Sera from
patients with multiple drug allergy syndrome contain circulating histamine-releasing factors. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2003;131:195—200.

7. Grattan CE, Wallington TB, Warin RP, Kennedy CT, Bradfield JW. A
serological mediator in chronic idiopathic urticaria: a clinical immunological and histological evaluation. Br J Dermatol. 1986;114:583-590.

8. Hide M, Francis DM, Grattan CEH, Hakimi J, Kochan JP, Greaves MW.
Autoantibodies against the high-affinity IgE receptor as a cause of
histamine release in chronic urticaria. N Engl J Med. 1993;328:
1599-1604.

9. Sabroe RA, Grattan CE, Francis DM, Barr RM, Kobza-Black A,
Greaves MW. The autologous serum skin test: a screening test for

 

10.

12.

20.

21.

22.

autoantibodies in chronic idiopathic urticaria. Br J Dermatol. 1999;140:
446-452.

Fagiolo U, Kricek F, Ruf C, Peserico A, Amadori A, Cancian M. Effects
of complement inactivation and IgG depletion on skin reactivity to
autologous serum in chronic idiopathic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2000;106:567-572.

. Asero R, Tedeschi A, Riboldi P, Cugno M. Plasma of patients with

chronic urticaria shows signs of thrombin generation, and its intradermal
injection causes wheal-and-flare reactions much more frequently than
autologous serum. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2006;117:1113-1117.
Bauer KA, Weitz JI. Laboratory markers of coagulation and fibrinolysi
In: Colman RW, Hirsh J, Marder VJ, Clowes AW, George JN, eds.
Hemostasis and Thrombosis: Basic Principles and Clinical Practice.
Philadelphia, PA: JB Lippincott; 2001:1113-1129.

 

 

 

. Asero R, Tedeschi A, Coppola R, et al. Activation of the tissue pathway

of blood coagulation in patients with chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin
Immunol. 2007;119:705-710.

. Schaeffer RC, Gong F, Bitrick MS, Smith TL. Thrombin and bradykinin

initiate discrete endothelial solute permeability mechanisms. Am J
Physiol. 1993;264:1798-1809.

. Cirino G, Cicala C, Bucci MR, Sorrentino L, Maranganore JM, Stone

SR. Thrombin functions as an inflammatory mediator through activation
of its receptors. J Exp Med. 1996;,183:821—827.

. Nobe K, Sone T, Paul RJ, Honda K. Thrombin-induced force develop
ment in vascular endothelial cells: contribution to alteration of permeability mediated by calcium-dependent and -independent pathways.
J Pharmacol Sci. 2005;99:252-263.

. Razin E, Marx G. Thrombin-induced degranulation of cultured bone

marrow-derived mast cells. J Immunol. 1984;133:3282-3285.

. Vliagoftis H. Thrombin induces mast cell adhesion to fibronectin: evi
dence for the involvement of protease-activated receptor-1. J Immunol.
2002; 169:4551—4558.

. Huber-Lang M, Sarma JV, Zetoune FS, et al. Generation of CSa in the

absence of C3: a new complement activation pathway. Nat Med. 2006;
12:682-687.

Ruff F, Saindelle A, Dutripon E, Parrot JL. Continuous automatic
fluorometric evaluation of total blood histamine. Nature. 1967;214:
279-281.

Asero R, Tedeschi A, Riboldi P, et al. Severe chronic urticaria is
associated with elevated plasma levels of D-dimer. Allergy. 2007; in
press.
Kikuchi Y, Kaplan AP. A role for CSa in augmenting IgG-dependent
histamine release from basophils in chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin
Immunol. 2002;109:114-118.

 

Requests for reprints should be addressed to:
Riccardo Asero, MD

Ambulatorio di Allergologia

Clinica San Carlo

Via Ospedale 21

20037 Paderno Dugnano (MI), Italy

E-mail: r.asero@libero.it

48

ANNALS OF ALLERGY, ASTHMA & IMMUNOLOGY
