J Cutan Pathol 2015: 42: 329-332
doi: 10.111 1/cup.12471
John Wiley & Sons. Printed in Singapore

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S.
Published by John Wiley & Sons Lid

 

Journal of

Cutaneous Pathology

Clinicopathologic findings in

(anti-FcepsilonR1alpha)

autoimmune-related chronic urticaria

Background: One cause of chronic urticaria is autoreactivity
which is diagnosed by detecting autoantibodies against the IgE
receptor alpha subunit (anti-Fc Rlalpha).

Objective: To compare the histopathologic features of chronic
urticaria patients testing positive for anti-IgE receptor antibody
(Ab) to those testing negative.

Methods: Totally, 438 patients with a clinical presentation of
chronic urticaria (2011-2013) had anti-IgE receptor Ab tested
and 37 of those patients had skin biopsy. We evaluated
microscopic features including: spongiosis, dermal edema,
presence of mast cells, density of lymphocytic infiltration,
predomination of eosinophils/neutrophils; intravascular
neutrophils and presence of vasculitis. The aforementioned
features were compared between negative and positive anti-IgE
receptor Ab groups.

Results: Of 37 patients , 69% were women and 31% were men.
49% had positive anti-IgE receptor Ab and 51% had negative
anti-IgE receptor Ab.

In the positive anti-IgE receptor Ab group, 83% showed
intravascular neutrophils. Eosinophil predominance was
identified in 72% and neutrophil predominance was identified in
28%. In the negative anti-IgE receptor Ab group, 89% showed
intravascular neutrophils. Eosinophil predominance was
identified in 53% and neutrophil predominance was identified in
47%. There was no evidence of vasculitis in either group.
Conclusion: There were no significant histopathologic
differences between the anti-IgE receptor Ab positive and
negative cases. Therefore, serum testing for anti-IgE receptor Ab
is required to identify this subgroup of chronic urticaria patients.

Keywords: Urticaria, Autoantibody, IgE, Dermatitis

Rojanapremsuk T, Kasprowicz S, Schafer E, Story R, Clarke MS,
Walls T, Snyder V, Gleason BC, Thomas AB, Cibull T.
Clinicopathologic findings in (anti-FcepsilonRlalpha)
autoimmune-related chronic urticaria.

J Cutan Pathol 2015; 42: 329-332. © 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd

 

 

Theera Rojanapremsuk',
Sarah Kasprowicz*, Ewa
Schafer’, Rachel Story‘,
Michael S Clarke®, Timothy
Walls", Vivian Snyder’,
Briana C Gleason®, Antoinette B
Thomas'? and Thomas Cibull'?

Department of Pathology, NorthShore
niversity HealthSystem, Evanston, IL, USA ,
Department of Pathology, University of
hicago Pritzker School of Medicine,
hicago, IL, USA ,
Department of Dermatology, NorthShore
niversity HealthSystem, Evanston, IL, USA ,
Allergy Immunology, NorthShore University
lealthSystem, Evanston, IL, USA ,
Department of Pathology, University of
inois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA , and
Department of Pathology, Path Group,
Nashville, TN, USA

oe mues

ce

 

 

 

e= or

 

 

 

 

 

Theera Rojanapremsuk, MD
Department of Pathology
NorthShore University HealthSystem
Evanston, IL, USA

e-mail: Theera0016@gmail.com

Accepted for publication February 7, 2015

329
Rojanapremsuk et al.

Urticarial dermatitis was clinically defined by
Kossard et al.! in 2006 as pruritic, erythematous
papules and plaques resembling urticaria but
lasting longer than 24h and sometimes accompanied by eczematous lesions. Kossard et al. also
described the histopathologic requirements for
a diagnosis of urticarial dermatitis, specifically,
the combination of upper dermal perivascular lymphocytic inflammation with eosinophils
and minimal associated epidermal spongiosis.
Some cases showed additional features, such as
deep perivascular inflammation, significant neutrophilia and parakeratosis.!

Chronic urticaria is one of the subtypes
of urticaria based on the EAACI/GA2LEN/
EDF/WAO guideline. Chronic urticaria is
defined as the spontaneous appearance of
wheals persisting at least 6 weeks and is usually
seen in middle-aged adults with a female predominance. Chronic urticaria are idiopathic in
50-75% cases; however, in recent years a significant number of patients with chronic idiopathic
urticaria have been reported to have an autoimmune basis for their urticaria.2 Chronic autoimmune urticaria is caused by anti-FceRlalpha
and, less frequently, by anti-IgE autoantibodies
that lead to mast cell and basophil activation.
The diagnosis of chronic autoimmune urticaria
requires specialized testing, such as the detection of autoantibodies directed against the IgE
receptor (anti-FceR1 Ab). It is important to recognize this group of patients because patients
with chronic autoimmune urticaria are often
resistant to antihistamine drugs. Our study compared the histopathologic features of chronic
urticaria patients with positive and negative
anti-IgE receptor Ab using criteria similar to that
of Kossard et al.

Methods

Totally 438 patients were seen in the dermatology
department at NorthShore University HealthSystem between 2011 and 2013 with a clinical presentation of chronic urticaria (persisting daily
or almost daily for more than 6 weeks). All
patients had anti-IgE receptor Ab testing, and 37
patients had skin biopsy for evaluation of chronic
urticaria. We blindly reviewed biopsy specimens
of those 37 patients for the presence or absence
of spongiosis, dermal edema, mast cells, density of lymphocytic infiltration, predominance of
eosinophils or neutrophils, presence or absence
of intravascular neutrophils and the presence
or absence of vasculitis. We then compared
these results between the negative and positive

330

anti-IgE receptor Ab groups. We also compared
the microscopic features of the anti-IgE receptor
Ab-positive group to the serum antibody levels.

Results

Of 438 patients with a clinical diagnosis of
chronic urticaria, 146 (33%) cases were positive for anti-IgE receptor Ab and 292 (67%)
cases were negative for anti-IgE receptor Ab.
The group with a positive anti-lgE receptor
Ab included 101 women and 45 men, with a
mean age of 35.4years (Table 1). Of the 438
CU patients 37 patients (8%) underwent skin
biopsies. This group included 27 (69%) women
and 12 (31%) men with a mean age of 45 years
(range, 13-82 years). Of 37 patients, 18 (49%)
were positive for anti-IgE receptor Ab and 19 of
37 (51%) were negative for anti-IgE receptor Ab.
Among 37 patients, 2 patients (5.4%) carried the
diagnosis of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis with abnormal antithyroglobulin antibodies. No other
autoantibodies were identified. Patient demographic analysis in this group is shown in Table 2.

Histopathologic analysis

Table 3 summarizes the results. In the positive anti-IgE receptor Ab group, 5 of 18 (28%)
showed mild epidermal spongiosis, and 13 of
18 (72%) showed no epidermal changes; 15
of 18 (83%) showed intravascular neutrophils.
Eosinophil predominance (Figure 1) was identified in 13 of 18 (72%) and neutrophil predominance (Figure 2) was identified in 5 of 18
(28%). Among 18 cases, 10 cases (55%) were
accompanied by a mild to moderate perivascular
lymphocytic infiltrate. In addition, 3 of 5 neutrophil predominant cases demonstrated more
than 50 neutrophils per HFP with a perivascular
to interstitial dermal neutrophilic infiltrate. In
the negative anti-IgE receptor Ab group, 4 of 19
(21%) showed mild epidermal spongiosis, and
15 of 19 (79%) showed no epidermal changes; 17
of 19 (89%) showed intravascular neutrophils.
Eosinophil predominance was identified in 10
of 19 (53%) and neutrophil predominance was
identified in 9 of 19 (47%). Among 19 cases, 12

Table 1. Characteristic of 146 patients with anti-lgE receptor Ab
positive

 

 

Characteristic Number (%)
Age, mean 35.4
Female 101 (69%)
Male 45 (31%)

 
Clinicopathologic findings in (anti-FcepsilonR1alpha)

Table 2. Patient demographic results

 

 

Patient demographics

Total number of patients Mean age Female Male
37 45 (range 13-82) 27 (69%) 12 (31%)
Positive anti-IgE receptor Ab = 18 43 (range 14-71) 12 (75%) 6 (25%)
Negative anti-IgE receptor Ab = 19 47 (range 13-82) 14 (74%) 5 (26%)

 

Table 3. The histopathologic features of 37 patients compared between anti-IgE positive and negative groups

 

 

Summary data

Anti-IgE receptor Ab Eosinophil predominant Neutrophil predominant Vasculitis
Positive 13 5 None
Negative 10 9 None

 

ASF I eN SS
| Ce Bap S

            
  

Fig. 1. Eosinophil predominant in positive Ab patient (20x)

cases (63%) were accompanied by a mild to moderate perivascular lymphocytic infiltrates. There
was no significant dermal edema by H&E examination and no vasculitis identified in any of the
37 patients. Mast cells were present in all 37 cases
but were few by H&E examination, not the predominant inflammatory cell type present.

Prior studies have shown no definite correlation between anti-IgE receptor Ab levels
and the severity of the disease. We evaluated
histopathologic features and compared them to
the anti-IgE receptor Ab level of each case in
our study. Among the positive anti-IgE receptor
Ab group, there was no significant differences in
histopathologic features between the eosinophil
predominant and the neutrophil predominant
cases and the anti-IgE receptor Ab levels.

Discussion

It is now recognized that approximately 30-40%
of chronic idiopathic urticaria is caused by
autoimmunity, and discovering the presence of
autoantibodies in those patients may be the key

  

ns) ’ VE LELLE REISS,

Fig. 2. Neutrophil predominant in positive Ab patient (20x)

to successful treatment. However, the diagnosis
and treatment of chronic autoimmune urticaria
can be challenging for the patient and the
clinician.

The concept of chronic autoimmune urticaria
is fairly new. In 1993, Hide etal. detected
histamine-releasing IgG autoantibodies against
the subunit of the high-affinity IgE receptor in
the circulation of some patients with chronic
urticaria, suggesting the pathogenesis of chronic
urticaria.? Subsequently, intensive research has
focused on the pathogenesis of chronic autoimmune urticaria and found that the cross-linkage
of the IgE receptor « subunit of FcepsilonRI
by pathogenic IgG results in the release of
histamine which is augmented by complement
C5a.4> Furthermore, patients with chronic
autoimmune urticaria tend to have more severe
symptoms, are more likely to have associated systemic symptoms and have a higher likelihood of
resistance to H1,antihistamines than those with
non-autoimmune chronic idiopathic urticaria.
Thus, in these patients, immunosuppressive
therapy may be warranted.° Therefore, the

331
Rojanapremsuk et al.

detection of this group of patients is of value
for the clinician in terms of follow-up and
appropriate treatment.

Unfortunately, there is no straightforward
test for autoimmune urticaria, and the diagnosis of chronic autoimmune urticaria is not
an easy one. Clinical evaluation, microscopic
assessment and the detection of autoantibodies
are helpful, but not specific. There are a few
clinical laboratory tests which are now available
for chronic autoimmune urticaria including
the autologous serum skin test, autologous
plasma skin test, detection of anti-IgE Receptor
antibodies by enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay or other immunobinding assays and the
basophil-histamine release test. Grattan et al.”
studied the pathologic appearance of the skin
in chronic autoimmune urticaria, but the findings were too non-specific to be used as a
diagnostic tool.

In our series, approximately 33% of patients
with chronic urticaria were positive for
anti-IgE receptor Ab with a predominance
in middle-aged females. We found no significant microscopic differences that would help
differentiate chronic urticaria patients with and
without anti-IgE receptor Ab. Interestingly, in
the anti-IgE receptor Ab positive group, we
found three cases demonstrating more than
50 neutrophils per HFP with a diffuse dermal
neutrophilic infiltrate. Therefore, neutrophilic
urticaria was brought to our attention, and a
brief discussion of the entity is warranted.

The concepts of neutrophilic urticaria

In 1985 Peters and Winkelmann® introduced the
term neutrophilic urticaria, which is characterized
clinically by the appearance of wheals and microscopically by neutrophils in dermal venules and
venular walls with no sign of vasculitis and no

References

1. Kossard $, Hamann I, Wilkinson B. Defining urticarial dermatitis: a subset of dermal hypersensitivity reaction pattern. Arch
Dermatol 2006; 142: 29.

2. Goh CL, Tan KT. C€

 

1995; 96: 2606.

 

 

Shronic autoimmune

 

pathogenetic factor for a distinct subset
of chronic urticaria patients. J Clin Invest

5. Kikuchi Y, Kaplan AP. A role for C5a
in augmenting IgG dependent histamine

associated systemic disease. Furthermore, Toppe
etal.? found a predominantly neutrophilic pattern in more cases of clinically acute urticaria
(55%) than in chronic urticaria (18%). In
addition, the intensity of the neutrophilic infiltrate was statistically related to the number of
eosinophils and mononuclear cells. More recent
articles have suggested that urticaria with a
neutrophilic infiltrate, or neutrophilic urticaria,
might be characterized by shorter flare-ups and
by an increase in acute phase reactants. In 2009,
Kieffer et al.!° defined a subtype of neutrophilic
urticaria called neutrophilic urticarial dermatosis. Neutrophilic urticarial dermatosis has a
significant interstitial distribution of the neutrophilic infiltrate along the collagen bundles
and also in the deep part of the reticular dermis
with significant leukocytoclasia. This entity bears
important medical significance as it is strongly
indicative of an associated systemic disease,
such as rheumatic disease, Schnitzler syndrome,
adult-onset Still disease, lupus erythematosus
and hereditary autoinflammatory fever. We
reviewed clinical and microscopic appearances
in our three patients and found no evidence of
systemic disease and/or pathologic features of
neutrophilic urticarial dermatosis.

Although our study design has some limitations including a relatively small sample size, lack
of knowledge about patient treatment status and
the presence or absence of active disease at the
time of biopsy, our findings suggest that microscopic examination is not helpful in differentiating chronic autoimmune urticaria patients from
other patients with chronic urticaria. However,
further exploration with the examination of a
larger number of cases may provide additional
information in this group of patients. In conclusion, serum testing, such as anti-IgE receptor Ab
assays is still required to identify this subgroup of
chronic urticaria patients.

 

late phase reaction. Int Arch Allergy
Immunol 1990; 93: 198.

8. Winkelmann RK, WilsonJones E, Smith

NP, English JS, Greaves MW. Neutrophilic

icaria. Acta Derm Venereol 1988; 68:

  

 

  

urticaria: where we stand? Indian J Dermatol 2009; 54: 269.

3. Hide M, Francis DM, Grattan CE, Hakimi
J, Kochan JP, Greaves MW. Autoantibodies
against the high affinity IgE receptor as
a cause for histamine release in chronic
urticaria. N Engl J Med 1993; 328: 1599.

4. Fiebiger E, Maurer D, Holub H, Reininger
B, Hartmann G, etal. Autoantibodies
directed against the alphachain of
Fcepsilon Rl: a selective marker and

332

. Grattan CE,

release from basophils in chronic urticaria.

J Allergy Clin Immunol 2002; 109: 114.
. Sabroe RA, Seed PT, Francis DM, et al.

Chronic idiopathic urticaria: comparison
of clinical features of patients with and
without anti-FceR1] or anti-IgE autoantibodies. J Am Acad Dermatol 1999; 40: 443.
Boon AP, Eady RA,
Winkelmann RK. The pathology of
the autologous serum skin test response in
chronic urticaria resembles IgE-mediated

 

 

9. Toppe E, Haas N, Henz BM. Neutrophilic

i clinical features, histological
changes and possible mechanisms. Br J
Dermatol 1998; 138: 248.

10. Kieffer C, Cribier B, Lipsker D. Neutrophilic urtic;
of neutrophilic urticaria strongly associated with systemic disease. Report of 9
new cases and review of the literature.
Medicine (Baltimore) 2009; 88: 23.

 

jal dermatosis: a variant

 
