EXPERIMENTAL AND THERAPEUTIC MEDICINE 20: 68-72, 2020

Acquired angioedema induced by angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors - experience of a hospital-based allergy center

POLLIANA MIHAELA LERU!”, VLAD FLORIN ANTON’, CORINA BOCSAN®,
ADRIANA MUNTEAN*® and DANIEL BODA®”

‘Family Medicine Department, ‘Carol Davila’ University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 050474 Bucharest;

“Internal Medicine Department, Colentina Clinical Hospital, 020125 Bucharest; 3Department of Pharmacology,

Toxicology and Clinical Pharmacology, ‘Iuliu Hatieganu’ University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 400337 Cluj-Napoca;

‘Department of Immunology and Allergology, ‘Iuliu Hatieganu’ University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 400012 Cluj-Napoca;

SAllergy Department, ‘Professor Doctor Octavian Fodor’ Regional Institute of Gastroenterology and Hepatology,

400162 Cluj-Napoca; Dermatology Research Laboratory, ‘Carol Davila’ University of Medicine and Pharmacy,

050474 Bucharest; "Dermatology Department, ‘Prof. N. Paulescu’ National Institute of Diabetes,

Nutrition and Metabolic Diseases, 011233 Bucharest, Romania

Received December 6, 2019; Accepted January 17,2020

DOE: 10.3892/etm.2020.8474

Abstract. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs)
represent an important group of pharmacological compounds,
largely prescribed for more than 30 years. They have been
extensively evaluated in clinical trials, demonstrating significant reduction of morbidity and mortality of patients with
cardiovascular diseases, mainly high blood pressure, myocardial infarction, heart failure and stroke. Besides their beneficial
effects and a general good safety profile, it was proven that
ACEIs might also induce adverse effects in some patients, most
notably angioedema (AE) and chronic cough. The occurrence
rate of adverse events induced by ACEIs is low, but the number
of suffering patients is relatively high, since ACEIs is one of
the most frequently prescribed medication worldwide. The aim
of our study was to evaluate clinical pattern, risk factors and
general management of ACEI-induced angioedema in a cohort
of patients addressed for allergist evaluation in one university
hospital in Romania, during a period of 32 months. It was
found that ACEI-induced angioedema (ACEI-AE) represented
more than half of the total number of patients addressed for
angioedema without urticaria, with variable clinical and
time-patterns. Most of the patients were referred by general
practitioners (GPs) with diagnosis of urticaria or other skin
allergy and continued to take ACEIs for months and years
after onset of angioedema. We concluded that the awareness of
acquired, non-allergic angioedema induced by ACEI therapy

 

Correspondence to: Dr Polliana Mihaela Leru, Internal Medicine
Department, Colentina Clinical Hospital, 19-21 Stefan cel Mare
Street, 020125 Bucharest, Romania

E-mail: polianaleru@yahoo.com

Key words: acquired angioedema, angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors, allergy center, safety profile

in medical practice is still low and there is a need for improved
knowledge and interdisciplinary collaboration in this field.

Introduction

Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) are known
as a potent antihypertensive medication since early 1980s,
representing an important and largely prescribed group of
pharmacological compounds (1). They have been extensively
evaluated in clinical trials, demonstrating significant reduction of morbidity and mortality of patients with cardiovascular
diseases, mainly high blood pressure, myocardial infarction,
heart failure and stroke. It was found that ACEIs represented
the most commonly used antihypertensive medication in the
United States since 2002 (2). Besides their beneficial effects
and a general good safety profile, it was proven that ACEIs
might also induce adverse effects in some patients, most
notably chronic cough and angioedema (AE) (3). The occurrence rate of adverse events to ACEIs is low, with estimated
incidence of angioedema between 0.1-2.2%, but the number
of suffering patients is relatively high, since ACEIs is one of
the most frequently prescribed classes of medication worldwide (4,5). Besides angioedema and cough, other less frequent
adverse reactions were mentioned, such as hyperkalemia,
hypotension, liver dysfunction and bone marrow depression.
Adverse reactions induced by ACEIs are secondary
to interference with the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
system (RAAS), which is responsible for the development
and progression of cardiovascular and renal disorders. ACEIs
block angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) activity, decrease
conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin II and also impact
the degradation metabolism of bradykinin, leading to its
increasing accumulation. The increased level of bradykinin
is responsible for cough and angioedema in some patients,
who become intolerant to this class of medication. Bradykinin
is a potent local mediator of vasodilatation and vascular
LERU et al: ACQUIRED ANGIOEDEMA INDUCED BY ANGIOTENSIN-CONVERTING ENZYME INHIBITORS 69

permeability, with very short half-life, being rapidly metabolized by peptidases in tissues and serum (6). The mechanism
of ACEIs intolerance is not fully understood and genetic and/
or environmental risk factors are considered to play an important role (7). It was proven that black race and female sex are
genetic risk factors, while other possible mixed genetic and
environmental risk factors are age over 65, history of drug
rash, concomitant seasonal or persistent allergic diseases,
concomitant medication with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs) or immunosuppressive agents and smoking,
while diabetes seems to be a protective factor (8,9).

Angioedema is a potentially severe, life-threatening
adverse event associated with ACEI medication and the
reported number of affected patients is accepted to be
continuously increasing (5). Retrospective studies from the
beginning of ACEI therapy mentioned that ACEI-induced
angioedema (ACEI-AE) represented 30-40% of the patients
with angioedema presenting to emergency departments (ED)
(10). Despite long experience with this class of medication,
ACEIs-AE is still underestimated and mislabeled as allergic
AE or urticaria by many physicians and its potential for severe
outcome is ignored. Recent publications on angioedema
update diagnosis criteria and management recommendations
for both hereditary and acquired angioedema, including mechanisms and characteristics of ACEI-induced angioedema (11).
There are two main forms of acquired angiodema in clinical
practice: Mast cell-mediated and bradykinin-mediated angioedema (12,13).

The aim of our study was to evaluate clinical pattern, risk
factors, outcome and general management of ACEI-induced
angioedema in a cohort of patients addressed for allergist
evaluation in one university hospital from Romania, during a
period of 32 months.

Materials and methods

A retrospective study of hospital data was performed
of the patients addressed for allergy consultation to the
hospital-based Allergy center during a 32 months period,
between January 2017 to August 2019. The following data
were recorded from the patients files: Age at hospital presentation, sex, indication for ACEIs therapy, types of ACE
inhibitors used, treatment duration before occurrence of the
first AE episode, AE localization, frequency and recurrence
rate, concomitant diseases and medication, allergist recommendations and management. The study group consisted of
50 patients who presented for angioedema during the study
period, being treated with ACEIs for variable time periods
previously. The study group represented 56.81% from the
total number of 88 patients addressed to the department for
angioedema without urticaria, during the same period of time.
The patients were aged between 45-83 years, with a mean
age of 63 years and the sex distribution showed a 64% female
predominance. From the total study group of 50 patients,
45 (90%) were treated with ACEIs for hypertension, 4 patients
were treated for chronic heart failure and one patient had
ischemic heart disease associated with chronic kidney disease.
Patients characteristics in terms of age, sex, hypertension stage
and concomitant diseases are showed in Table I. The patients
signed an informed consent for publication of their health data

Table I. Patients characteristics.

 

 

Mean 63 years
Age
<65 years 27 pts (54%)
265 years 23 pts (46%)
Sex
Female 32 pts (64%)
Male 18 pts (36%)
Hypertension stage
Stage II 14 pts (28%)
Stage III 36 pts (72%)

Concomitant diseases

Diabetes mellitus type IL 11 pts (22%)

 

Chronic intermittent urticaria 16 pts (30%)
COPD 2 pts (4%)
Autoimmune thyroiditis 6 pts (12%)
Degenerative osteoarticular disease 12 pts (24%)
CAPTOPRIL
% —-RAMIPRIL
3
3
2 QUINAPRIL
2
a
= ENALAPRIL
5
o
<< PERINDOPRIL
ZOFENOPRIL
0 5 10 15 20 25 30

Number of patients

Figure 1. Pharmacological substances from ACEIs class used by the study
group (number of patients for each substance). ACEIs, angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitors.

Results

In total, 34 patients out of 50 (68%) received ACEIs in monotherapy and 16 patients used fixed dose combinations with
ACE inhibitors. The most frequently used pharmacological
substances were perindopril in 52% of patients and enalapril
in 26% (Fig. 1).

Double or triple combinations with ACEIs were: Perindopril
plus indapamide/perindopril plus amlodipine/perindopril plus
indapamide plus amlodipine.

Regarding the duration of ACEI therapy before onset of
angioedema, this was less than one year in only 5S patients (10%).
In one case angioedema occurred during the same day of the
first ACEI intake in one fixed dose combination, in two cases
AE occurred during the first month and in further 2 patients
AE occurred after 7 and 12 months, respectively. In half of
the studied group, the AE episodes occurred within a time
period between 1-5 years after ACEI therapy initiation, in
7 patients (14%) AE occurred after variable time period
70 EXPERIMENTAL AND THERAPEUTIC MEDICINE 20: 68-72, 2020

Number of patients

<1 year 1-5 years 5-10 years >10 years

Duration of treatment

Figure 2. Duration of treatment with ACEIs (number of patients for each time
period). ACEIs, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors.

LARYNGEAL
PERIORBITAL, CHEEK, CHIN
TONGUE

LIPS AND TONGUE

Angioedema localization

ups
T
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 #16 «#18

Number of patients

Figure 3. Angioedema localization (number of patients for each site).

between 5-10 years, while in 13 patients (26%) AE occurred
after more than 10 years (Fig. 2).

The patients continued to take ACEIs after AE onset, except
three cases who discontinued ACEIs and replaced it with angiotensin-receptor blocker (ARBs) before hospital presentation.

Regarding the site of angioedema, all patients presented
with facial angioedema, 15 patients had angioedema of the
lips, 12 patients had angioedema of both lips and tongue and
5 patients developed tongue angioedema alone. Laryngeal
edema was found in one case only (Fig. 3).

Regarding the frequency of AE episodes, about half of the
study group (24 patients) presented for allergist evaluation after
1 or 2 episodes of angioedema and 26 patients presented after
3 or more AE episodes. The AE recurrence rate was lower,
~1-3 AE episodes per year in cases of patients with longer AE
history before hospital presentation. Only 18 patients had AE
at the time of hospital presentation, including the patient with
laryngeal AE confirmed by ENT examination.

It was found that 16 patients (32%) declared history
of chronic mild urticaria, but not concomitant with AE
episodes and 12 patients (24%) declared intermittent intake of
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for chronic
osteo-articular symptoms, which was coincident with AE
episodes in only two cases.

Written documentation regarding medical attitude at ED
could be found in less than half of the patients, with confirmation of adrenaline administration in only six cases.

Allergist recommendations on hospital presentation
consisted of monitoring until complete resolution of AE,

immediate discontinuation of ACEIs and replacement
with other antihypertensive therapy, mostly diuretics and/
or calcium blockers and ARBs in five cases, evaluation of
severity and possible risk factors for AE, treatment with
systemic corticosteroids and antihistamines. The clinical
outcome was good in all cases, with almost complete remission of AE in less than 24 h. In 6 patients (12%) recurrence
of AE episodes was recorded during the first month after
discontinuation of ACEIs, but with reduced intensity and
duration.

Discussion

The study showed that ACEI-induced angioedema represented
more than half of the patients with acquired angioedema
addressed to one hospital-based Allergy center during a
period of 32 months. Almost all of the patients from the study
group were referred by their general practitioners (GPs) with
diagnosis of urticaria or other skin allergies, being mislabeled
as allergy in most of the cases. It was found that a significant
number of patients had a long history of angioedema, until
diagnosis confirmation, more than 10 years after initiation
of ACEI treatment. This is a longer period comparing with
published data from the literature, reporting that ACEI-AE
can appear from few hours up to 8 years after ACEI therapy
initiation (14). Previous publications showed that AE most
often occurred within the first month of ACEI treatment
and ~27% of cases occurred after more than 6 months after
treatment initiation (10). Regarding the risk factors for ACEI
induced angioedema mentioned in the literature, the results
of this study showed a 64% female predominance, with
not relevant contribution of age >65 years, co-morbidities
or concomitant medication, possible due to rather small
study group.

Data from the literature showed that ACEI-related
angioedema has an increasing prevalence and severity
during the last decades, being underestimated in clinical
practice (15). It was proven that failure to recognize the relation between angioedema and ACEI treatment may lead to
unnecessary morbidity and mortality, caused by the lack of
medical provider knowledge and low frequency of this type
of reaction. A published survey of physician's knowledge,
including cardiologists, GPs and allergists, demonstrated a
rather poor awareness of the ACEI adverse reactions, with
correct responses in about half of the group (16). Majority of
the patients with angioedema are considered having food or
drug allergy and treated with antihistamines, corticosteroids
and epinephrine, despite unclear response. Difficulties in
recognizing allergies and discriminating between allergic
and intolerant patients are due to limited university or
postgraduate training of medical staff in the field of allergic
diseases, despite increasing prevalence and severity of this
pathology (17). A recent local study investigating knowledge
and attitude of GPs in the field of drug allergies revealed
a significant need for training and updated information in
allergic diseases, as well as for interdisciplinary collaboration (18).

Angioedema without urticaria may raise significant
problems in clinical practice, mainly due to unclear etiopathology, variable clinical presentation and potential for severe
LERU et al: ACQUIRED ANGIOEDEMA INDUCED BY ANGIOTENSIN-CONVERTING ENZYME INHIBITORS 71

outcome (19). The classic clinical presentation of ACEI-AE is
recurrent episodes of lips and tongue edema, without urticaria
and pruritus (20). History of atopy or concomitant allergies
are usually missing and clinical outcome is not significantly
influenced by antihistamines and corticosteroids, due to
non-allergic underlining mechanism (21). The late onset as
well as variable clinical pattern of ACEI-AE can be confusing
for both patients and medical professionals, who should take
into consideration the potential role of risk factors and triggers (22). Depending on associated risk factors or concomitant
diseases and medications, patients may have an increased
risk for severe forms, even fatal angioedema due to laryngeal
edema (23). This life-threatening reaction is possible even after
the first dose of an ACEI, with higher risk in female patients
and in African-American population (24). It has been proven
that African-American patients have an increased sensitivity
to bradykinin compared to Caucasian patients and that patients
with heart failure have higher rates of angioedema due to ACEI
medication (25,26). In rare cases of acquired angioedema in
adult patients, this may be first attributed to ACEI therapy,
but later revealing another mechanism and pathology, such
is the acquired Cl-inhibitor deficiency due to hematological
neoplasia or autoimmune or unknown diseases (27). Regarding
therapeutic approach of ACEI-induced angioedema, several
new drugs used for the treatment of hereditary angioedema,
such as icatibant (a bradykinin receptor antagonist), have been
evaluated, due to similar pathophysiological mechanism (9).

The main limitation of our study is the small study group
and experience of one allergy center only, during a rather short
period of time.

It was concluded that acquired, non-allergic angioedema
induced by ACEI therapy is a frequent and possible severe
condition in medical practice and the awareness of both
patients and medical staff is still low. It is important that all
clinicians have adequate information and training with regard
to safety profile of ACEIs and the most frequent possible
adverse events, such as recurrent angioedema and chronic
cough. A standardized medical attitude, including detailed
written documentation of medication at emergency departments and improved interdisciplinary collaboration in this
field are needed.

Acknowledgements

Not applicable.

Funding

Not funding was received.
Availability of data and materials

The datasets used during the present study are available from
the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

Authors' contributions
PML designed the current study, analyzed and interpreted data
sets and wrote the manuscript. VFA composed and analyzed
the datasets. CB, AM and DB contributed to the study design,

drafting and revision of the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final version of the manuscript.

Ethics approval and consent to participate

The patients signed an informed consent for publication of
their health data.

Patient consent for publication
Not applicable.
Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests in relation with
this study and manuscript.

References

1. Smith RE and Ashiya M: Antihypertensive therapies. Nat Rev
Drug Discov 6: 597-598, 2007.

2. Gu Q, Paulose-Ram R, Dillon C and Burt V: Antihypertensive
medication use among US adults with hypertension. Circulation 113: 213-221, 2006.

3. Dunlap ME and Peterson RC: ACE inhibitors vs ARBs: Is one
class better for heart failure. Cleve Clin J Med 69: 433-438,
2002.

4. Cicardi M, Zingale LC, Bergamaschini L and Agostoni A:
Angioedema associated with angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitor use: Outcome after switching to a different treatment.
Arch Intern Med 164: 910-913, 2004.

5. Banerji A, Clark S, Blanda M, LoVecchio F, Snyder B and
Camargo CA Jr: Multicenter study of patients with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor-induced angioedema who
present to the emergency department. Ann Allergy Asthma
Immunol 100: 327-332, 2008.

6. Nussberger J, Cugno M and Cicardi M: Bradykinin-mediated
angioedema. N Engl J Med 347: 621-622, 2002.

7. Morimoto T, Gandhi TK, Fiskio JM, Seger AC, So JW, Cook EF,
Fukui T and Bates DW: An evaluation of risk factors for adverse
drug events associated with angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors. J Eval Clin Pract 10: 499-509, 2004.

8. Hoover T, Lippmann M, Grouzmann E, Marceau F and Herscu P:
Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor induced angio-oedema:
A review of the pathophysiology and risk factors. Clin Exp
Allergy 40: 50-61, 2010.

9. Terreehorst I, Reitsma S and Cohn DM: Current treatment of
Angioedema induced by ACE inhibitors. Curr Treat Options
Allergy 6: 18-26, 2019.

10. Gabb GM, Ryan P, Wing LM and Hutchinson KA: Epidemiological
study of angioedema and ACE inhibitors. Aust N Z J Med 26:
777-782, 1996.

11. Cicardi M, Aberer W, Banerji A, Bas M, Bernstein JA, Bork K,
Caballero T, Farkas H, Grumach A, Kaplan AP, et al; HAWK
under the patronage of EAACI (European Academy of Allergy
and Clinical Immunology): Classification, diagnosis, and
approach to treatment for angioedema: Consensus report from the
Hereditary Angioedema International Working Group. Allergy 69:
602-616, 2014.

12. Craig TJ, Bernstein JA, Farkas H, Bouillet L and Boccon-Gibod I:
Diagnosis and treatment of bradykinin-mediated angioedema:
Outcomes from an angioedema expert consensus meeting. Int
Arch Allergy Immunol 165: 119-127, 2014.

13. Nedelea I and Deleanu D: Isolated angioedema: An overview
of clinical features and etiology (Review). Exp Ther Med 17:
1068-1072, 2019.

14. Agostoni A, Cicardi M, Cugno M, Zingale LC, Gioffré D and
Nussberger J: Angioedema due to angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors. Immunopharmacology 44: 21-25, 1999.

15. Zingale LC, Beltrami L, Zanichelli A, Maggioni L, Pappalardo E,
Cicardi B and Cicardi M: Angioedema without urticaria: A large
clinical survey. CMAJ 175: 1065-1070, 2006.

 
72

16.

17.

18.

19.
20.
PAI
22.

EXPERIMENTAL AND THERAPEUTIC MEDICINE 20: 68-72, 2020

Lombardi C, Crivellaro M, Dama A, Senna G, Gargioni S and
Passalacqua G: Are physicians aware of the side effects of
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors?: A questionnaire
survey in different medical categories. Chest 128: 976-979, 2005.
Shakib S, Caughey GE, Fok JS and Smith WB: Adverse drug
reaction classification by health professionals: Appropriate
discrimination between allergy and intolerance? Clin Transl
Allergy 9: 18, 2019.
Leru PM: Drug allergies in primary care practice in Romania: A
questionnaire-based survey. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol 10:
16, 2014.
Aberer W: Angioedema is not just ‘deep urticaria’ but an entity
of its own. Allergy 69: 549-552, 2014.

Agostoni A and Cicardi M: Drug-induced angioedema wit
urticaria. Drug Saf 24: 599-606, 2001.

Cicardi M and Zanichelli A: Acquired angioedema. Allergy
Asthma Clin Immunol 6: 14, 2010.
Schiller PI, Messmer SL, Haefeli WE, Schlienger RG and
Bircher AJ: Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor-induced
angioedema: Late onset, irregular course, and potential role of
triggers. Allergy 52: 432-435, 1997.

out

 

235

24.

255

26.

WAR

Krogh Nielsen T, Bygum A and Rye Rasmussen E: Life-threatening
angio-oedema after the first dose of an ACE inhibitor-not an
anaphylactic reaction. BMJ Case Rep 2016: pii: ber2016214364,
2016. doi: 10.1136/ber-2016-214364.

Dean DE, Schultz DL and Powers RH: Asphyxia due to angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor mediated angioedema
of the tongue during the treatment of hypertensive heart disease.
J Forensic Sci 46: 1239-1243, 2001.

Makani H,Messerli FH, Romero J, Wever-Pinzon O, Korniyenko A,
Berrios RS and Bangalore S: Meta-analysis of randomized trials
of angioedema as an adverse event of renin-angiotensin system
inhibitors. Am J Cardiol 110: 383-391, 2012.

McDowell SE, Coleman JJ and Ferner RE: Systematic review and
meta-analysis of ethnic differences in risks of adverse reactions
to drugs used in cardiovascular medicine. BMJ 332: 1177-1181,
2006.
Leru PM, Anton VF and Bumbea H: Nine year follow-up of a rare
case of angioedema due to acquired Cl-inhibitor deficiency with
late onset and good response to attenuated androgen. Allergy
Asthma Clin Immunol 14: 69, 2018.

 
