 

SPECIAL ARTICLE

 

Chronic Autoimmune Urticaria

Wardhana, E.A. Datau

Department of Internal Medicine, Siloam International Hospitals. Siloam Hospitals Group’s CEO Office, Siloam
Hospital Lippo Village 5th floor. Jl. Siloam no. 6, Karawaci, Indonesia. Correspondence mail: wadiswas@yahoo.com.

ABSTRAK

Urtikaria kronik umum terjadi dan pasien dapat memiliki gejala dan tanda sementara seperti rasa gatal,
kemerahan, dan pembengkakan atau edema jaringan dermis, yang dapat berlangsung lebih dari enam minggu.
Salah satunya adalah urtikaria idiopatik kronik, dan di antaranya adalah urtikaria autoimun. Urtikaria autoimun
kronik disebabkan oleh afinitas reseptor IgE (anti-FceRI) yang tinggi, dan penyebab yang lebih jarang adalah
autoantibody anti-IgE; selain itu, aktivasi komplemen juga memiliki peranan yang dapat mengakibatkan aktivasi
sel mast dan basofil. Meskipun telah banyak kemajuan dalam memahami urtikaria autoimun kronik, kondisi ini

tetap menjadi tantangan tersendiri, terutama dalam hal etiologi, pemeriksaan, dan tata laksananya.
Kata kunci: kronik, autoimun, urtikaria.

ABSTRACT

Chronic urticaria is common and patients may present with transient eruption of itchy, eruthematous,
edematous swellings of the dermis, which lasts more than six weeks. One type of chronic idiopathic urticaria, and
part of it, is the chronic autoimmune urticaria. The chronic autoimmune urticaria is caused by high affinity of IgE
receptors (anti-FceRI) and less frequently by anti-lgE autoantibodies, also the role of complement activation, that
leads to mast and basophil activation. Despite many recent advances in the understanding of chronic autoimmune

urticaria, this condition remains a major challenge in the terms of its etiology, investigations, and management.

Key words: chronic, autoimmune, urticaria.

INTRODUCTION

Urticaria is defined as intense, itching
welts caused by allergic reactions to internal
and external agents. The word of urticaria is
derived from the latin word urtica, which means
“nettle”, which are tooth-leaved palnts covered
with hairs capable of secreting a stinging fluid
that immediately affects the skin on contact.'*
Urticarial lessions resulting from localized edema

  

B

Figure 1. A) Urticaria — annular configuration. B) Urticaria

of upper dermis are called wheals. By definition, on the neck.
acute urticaria resolves than six weeks, whereas
the chronic urticaria (CU) lasts six weeks or Urticaria affects 15-25% of the population at

more with continuous disease activity, but when _ least once in their life time. The chronic urticaria
occuring intermitently over a period of more than is more common in adults, affecting mainly
six weeks can be defined as episodic (Figure 1).'* middle-aged women, and is rare in children

Acta Medica Indonesiana - The Indonesian Journal of Internal Medicine | 165
Wardhana

and adolescents.” The CU, based on the cause,
is devided into the CU caused by identifiable
cause in 5-10% of the cases (the chronic physical
urticaria including symtomatic dermatographism,
delayed pressure urticaria, cold urticaria,
aquagenic urticaria, solar urticaria, cholinergic
urticaria, vibratory urticaria vasculitis; and the
other is the chronic vasculitis urticaria), the
chronic idiopathic urticaria in 50% of cases (up
to 30% of chronic idiopathic urticaris have an
autoimmune basis), and the chronic autoimmune
urticaria (CAU) in more than 30% of cases.'3

PATHOGENESIS

Genetic background is thought to be a
relevant factor in autoimmune diseases, including
CAU. A study in large population of CU patients
showed a marked increase in prevalence of the
disease among the first degree relatives and
showing a family history of autologous serum
skin test (ASST), which suggests the presence
of circulating autoantibodies, and the association
with autoimmune thyroiditis has long been
recognized, and anti-thyroglobulin or anti-thyroid
peroxidase antibodies can be detected in 25-30%
of these patients.‘ No obvious explaination for
this association has been proposed. The recent
observation that the DRB1*04-DQB1*0301
halotype is significantly increased in these
patients with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, which
may indicate a common genetic background.
An association with Grave’s disease is less
common.** Nevertheless, there is some evidence
of genetic predisposition, since particular major
histocompability complex (MHC) alleles may
contribute to the autoimmunity because they are
inefficient at displaying self antigens, leading to
defective negative selection of T cells, or because
peptide antigens presented by these MHC alleles
may fail to stimulate regulatory T cells. There is
increased prevalence of MHC class I-Bw4 and
MHC class II- DRB1*04 (DR4) and its associated
allele, DQ*0302 (DQ8) genotype found in
patients with in vivo and in vitro histaminereleasing activity.*°

The mechanisms involved in the regulation
and activation of immune cells in CAU have
not been well investigated. Studies of the
pathogenesis of CU indicate that a subpopulation
of patients have a cutaneous autoimmune disease
associated with antibody to the IgE receptor.°
Whereas atopic allergy is a well-defined T

166

Acta Med Indones-Indones J Intern Med

helper 2 cell (Th2)-type immunologic response,
autoimmune disease are variable, although many
are associated with Thl lymphocytes, but the
data presented from skin biopsies of CU had a
ThO (virgin or naive Th) phenotype because there
were significant increases in interferon-gamma
(IFN-y), interleukin 4 (IL-4), and interleukin
5 (IL-5) mRNA+ cells. Alternatively, it is also
possible that there is a mixture of Th1/Th2 cell
types. Allergen induced late-phase reaction
(LPR) resembling the immune responsiveness
of CU histologically, produce IL-4 and IL-5, but
not IFN-y.°’ The Th0 arrive at each surveillance
stopover in a secondary lymphoid organ via the
bloodstream. In the case of lymph nodes and
Peyer’s patches, the high endothelial venules
(HEVs), which are specialized blood vessels,
serve as the nidus of attraction for the T cells
to enter the tissue. The extravasation of the ThO
through HEVs relies on the intercellular adhesion
molecules (ICAMs) that engage the integrin
lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1 (LFA1)?

The ThO lymphocytes may be found in the
skin tissue of CU, since in the autoimmue diseases
there is thymic T cells hyporesponsiveness
or unresponsiveness (anergy) to the antigens
expressed in the thymic environment during
the early immune cells’ positive and negative
selection and in induction of self-tolerance.’ The
ThO lymphocytes need at least two signals for
their proliferation and differentiation into effector
cells: signal 1 is always antigen, and signal 2 is
provided by costimulators that are expressed on
antigen-presenting cells (APC). The best-defined
costimulator for T cells are two related proteins
called B7-1 (CD80) and B7-2 (CD86). These B7
proteins, which usually come from microbes, are
recognized by a receptor called CD28, which is
expressed on virtually all T cells, Signals from
CD28 on T cells binding on APCs work together
with signals generated by binding of T cell
receptor (TCR) and coreceptor to peptide-MHC
complexes on the same APCs.>**

The CD28-mediated signaling is essential for
initiating the response of ThO lymphocytes. The T
lymphocytes with receptors for the self antigens
are able to recognize the antigens and thus receive
prolonged signals from their antigen receptors,
but the T cells do not receive strong costimulation
because there is no accompanying innate immune
response.° Under this condition, the TCR may
Vol 44 « Number 2 « April 2012

lose their ability to transmit activating signals
(aberrant signals).’

The TCR a and B chain from the ligandbinding subunit which recognized antigenic
peptides bound to MHC complex molecules.
The signaling process is provided by y, 6, and €
polypeptides of the CD3 complex as well as the
¢ chain heterodimer and involves two principal
signaling pathways. 10 The first pathway depends
on the stimulation of protein-tyrosine kinase
(PTK) activity and involves at least three PTKs,
Fyn, Lek, and C-chain associated protein kinase,
which appear to form a cooperative kinase
network. The second pathway, which depends
upon the activity of PTKs, involves the induction
of inositol phospholipid turnover which leads to
protein kinase C (PKC) activation.'*"!

The signaling on TCR activates serine/
threonine kinase belonging to the mitogenactivated protein kinase (MAP kinase) or
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)
family. This molecular information is transmitted
as signal from activated PTKs through serine/
threonine kinases in the cytoplasm to reach
transcription factors in the nucleus. The activation
of TCR will translocate human son-of-sevenless (hSOS) into the inner surface of the plasm
membrane and produce guanine nucleotide
exchange factors (GNEF),which exchange the
guanosine diphosphate (GDP) for guanosine
triphosphate (GTP), to activate the proto-oncogen
(p21Ras). The p21Ras plays an upstream role
in signal transmitting by activating the MAP
kinase.'*!? The aberrant expression and function
of p21Ras pathway may be not only present
in T lymphocytes during early phase of T-cell
maturation, but also in the B lymphocytes
response to antigenic stimuli that may disrupt B
cells regulatory mechanisms, resulting ultimately
in autoantibody production and autoimmune
diseases (Figure 2).°

Although most patients with CU appear
to have an idiopathic disorder, in a consistent
proportion of cases an autoimmune (CAU) has
been suggested, since they have circulating
immunoglobulin G (IgG) directed against
the alpha (a) subunit of the high affinity
immunoglobulin E (IgE) receptor (anti-FceRIa)
and the less frequent is IgG anti-IgE antibodies
(Figure 3).'° The IgG subclass analysis of the
pathogenic IgG, resulted a preponderance of
IgG1 and IgG3 anti-a. This to be consistent with

 

 

 

Chronic Autoimmune Urticaria

complement dependence of the reaction, because
IgG1 and IgG3 fix the classical complement
pathway.'*!5

& Environmental
Trigger ?

 

Figure 2. Aberrant regulation of the p21Ras pathway in
lymphocytes of patients with CIU: possible mechanisms
leading to autoimmune disease. Genetically determined
aberrant p21Ras signaling interferes with thymic T-cell
selection (1), leading to a release of self-aggressive T cells
(2). Alternatively, exposure to an unknown environmental
trigger (3) results in an aberrant signaling in B and T cells (4)
and disrupts immune balance. T cell—assisted (5) production
of anti-FceRI autoantibodies (auto Abs) by B cells (6) and a
direct interaction of autoimmune T cells with mast cells (7)
lead to autoimmune chronic urticaria.?

IgG anti Receptor
antibody

Secretion

“Late phase”
reaction

Infiltrative Hive

Figure 3. Diagram of the activation of cutaneous mast cells
by IgG antibody directed to the IgE receptor.'?

The activation of the classical complement
pathway appears to be requisite. To initiate cell
activation, the Fe portion of 2 IgG molecules
in proximity must be able to bind to 2 of the 6
globular heads of Clq. To achieve this, only one
fragment antibody (Fab) of each of 2 adjacent IgG
molecules needs to bind to adjacent a-subunits.
In this process the CSa is likely the cell activator
and it is known to be a more effective cutaneous
basophils and mast cells activator than is C3a
(Figure 4).'*'° The complement activation and the
release of CSa results not only in augmented mast

167
Wardhana

cells and basophils, but it is also a chemotactic for
neutrophils, eosinophils, and monocytes, which
is one of the factors that would distinguish this
lesion from a typical allergen-induced cutaneous
late-phase reaction.'”

    
 

Antigen-Antibody (Ig)
Complex

AX

anti-FcsRI Ig

Cell Activation
Mediator Release
Histamine
Leukotrienes
Cytokines
Chemokines

0a Receptor

Ig€ Receptor

Figure 4. Diagrammatic representation of mast cell activation
by cross-linking the IgE receptor, followed by complement
activation and release of C5a."°

The autoantibodies in CAU are able to induce
histamine release from mast cells and basophils
via a direct cross-linking of adjacent IgE
receptors or IgE itself. The activated mast cells
and basophils will express the CD63, a member
of the transmembrane-4 superfamily, which is
a mast cell and basophils activation marker as
a result of the fusion between intracytoplasmic
granules and the plasma membrane. Another
marker on activated mast cells and basophils,
which is more specific, is CD203c (ectonucleotid
pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase) is an
ectoenzyme expressed only on resting and
activated basophils, mast cells in response to
cross-linking of the FcsRIa receptors and their
CD34+ progenitor cells in peripheral blood.18
Histamine is certainly the main mediator
involved in CAU, de novo (newly synthesises) of
leukotriene C4 (LTC4) also induced. The LTC4
is about 1,000 times more potent than histamine
in causing wheal and flare reaction. There is little
evidence that platelet-activating factor, cytokines,
and chemokines released by activated mast cells,
are involved in the pathogenesis of urticarial
lesions.*

There is association of CAU with several
other autoimmune disease. The CAU may have
association with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (less
association with Graves disease) in 5-10%
of CAU, since there is anti-thyroperoxidase

168

Acta Med Indones-Indones J Intern Med

antibodies (anti-TPO antibody) segregate
with the presence of antibodies to the IgE
receptor (or to IgE).'° The low serum vitamin
B12 has an association with CAU since there
are antigastric parietal cell antibodies and
chronic antral gastritis.*° The celiac disease
may also be related to CAU since they share the
same major histocompability complex (MHC)
alleles (alotype DQ2-DQ8).”! Infection by
several microbes, such as Helycobacter pylori,
streptococcus, staphylococcus, yersenia, hepatitis
A and B virus, and larvae of Anasakis simplex
(cephalopods parasite commonly found in fish)
may also induce CAU through the molecular
mimicry mechanism between their antigens and
host proteins.”

CLINICAL PRESENTATION

The cardinal clinical presentation of
urticaria that distinguish it from any other
types of inflammatory eruption are the repeated
occurrence of short-lived cutaneous wheals
accompanied by redness and itching. The wheals
are lesions ranging from a few millimeters to
several centimeters in diameter, although if
they run together and become confluent much
larger plaques may occur. Urticarial wheals
are generally paler than the bright red of the
surrounding skin because of the compressing
effect of dermal edema on the normally bloodengorged postcapillary venules. The surrounding
skin may sometimes be conspicuously pale
rather than red, giving the impression of a white
halo.**> The wheals may be round or irregular
with pseudopodia. The quality of itching may
be pricking or burning and usually worse in the
evening or nighttime. It is relieved by rubbing
the skin rather than scratching.

DIAGNOSIS

A detailed history is of utmost importance,
especially related to the duration of complaints.
History should differentiate between types of
lesions.*° It includes the history of recurrent
transient hives or swelling, several associated
diseases and family history of angioedema, diet,
used drugs, infections such as upper respiratory
tract infection, physical exertion, psychologic
stress, alcoholism, cold, or solar expossure
resulted in urticaria (aggravating factors). The
urticarial lessions that last less than | hour is
Vol 44 « Number 2 « April 2012

usually a physical urticaria, with delayed pressure
urticaria as an exception, as it has the peak of
symptom between 3-6 hours and will disappear
in 24 hours. The contact urticaria usually lasts in
just a moment but it has a late phase reaction that
lasts for several hours. In the typical urticarial
vasculitis, the lesions may last more than 24
hours and still remain until 1 week. Several kinds
of drugs may increase the risk of exacerbation
and should avoid the using of this drugs: opiate,
curare, radiologic contrast, several antibiotics
such as penicillin, COX-2 inhibitor, aspirin,
non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID),
salicylate, and benzoate or tartazine contained
in foods. The ACE-inhibitor and angiotensin II
receptor inhibitor are drugs that usually cause
angioedema.**”°

Chronic Autoimmune Urticaria

The additional examinations may help to
make the diagnosis of CAU (Figure 5). The C1
esterase inhibitor level may help in diagnosing
angioedema. Most investigators concur that
laboratory test such as complete blood count
(CBC), chemistry panel, complement level,
and skin test in vivo and radio-allergosorbent
test (RAST) for specific IgE which only give
type I hypersensitivity, are non-contributory.
The autoimmune markers such as anti-nuclear
antibody (ANA), anti-TPO antibody, and other
autoimmune markers such as rheumatoid factor
are worthy of consideration since there are
consistent findings of increased frequency with
other autoimmune diseases.”*’

A simple screening test of CAU is the
autologous serum skin test (ASST), using the

History: recurrent Clinical appearance:
transient hives or swelling wheals, angioedema

 

Wheals + angioedema

 
 

 
 
  

24-48 hrs with either

bruising, severe
arthralgia, fever, LC4

Duration of individual hive
30 min to 2 hr

Course
< 6 weeks

4 hr to 36 hr

 

/|

   

Course
> 6 weeks

History
physical
stimulus

Consider drugs,

foods, food skin

testing, infection
(particularly in

Thyroid function
tests, anti-microsomal
antibody, antithyroglobulin antibody,
autologous skin test,
in vitro-anti-lgE
receptor

physical
challenge

children}, other
identifiable stimulus

 

Acute
urticaria/
angioedema

Chronic
autoimmune
urticaria

Physical

urticaria

 

Approach to patient
with urticaria/angioedema

 

Chronic
idiopathic
urticaria

Md
Angicedema only

t

Drugs, ACE inhibitor,
other family history

Y
C4 level
C1 inhibitor by protein

and function

   
   

  

Idiopathic
angioedema

     
   
    
     

  

Normal
C1Q level

Hereditary angioedema
a. C1 INH protein + function
y abnormal = Type 1
b. C1 INH protein normal

or elevated = Type 2

 

Skin
biopsy

 

  

Depressed
€10 level

Search for
lymphoma connective tissue
disease Type |

Urticarial

vasculitis

 

  

These
may overlap

Figure 5. Approach to the patient with urticaria/angioedema.*>

169
Wardhana

patient own serum injected intradermally, which
resemble an IgE-mediated late phase reaction.
This test is a useful tool for picking up patients
with circulating wheal-producing factor (antiFceRI), with about 70% in sensitivity and 80%
in specifity, but this test should be considered a
crude screening test and should not be used as
a specific test for the detection of circulating
autoantibodies.** The ASST positivity has been
also reported to correlate with the duration attack
and disease severity, but it also may give the false
positive result due to the presence of other whealinducing factors in the serum such as mast cells
specific factor or vasoactive kinin-like products
released during the course of coagulation.*”8

At present the most useful in vitro method
for the diagnosis of CAU antibodies is the
demonstration of the release of histamine (or
another reactant) from the target basophils or
dermal mast cells. The gold standard for detecting
clinically relevant to autoantibodies to FceRI
(using immunoassays methods such as Western
blotting and enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay or ELIZA) is the functional in vitro
donor basophil histamine release assay (serum
histamine releasing activity/HRA).”°

The four millimeter Skin Punch Biopsy
may help to make the diagnosis of CAU, to
differentiate with other type of urticarial lesion,
especially the urticarial vasculitis which skin
biopsy may reveal vascular injury with or without
fibrinoid deposits in or around the vessel wall,
endothelial swelling, perivascular neutrophilic
infiltrate, leukocytoclasis (fragmentation of
neutrophils with nuclear dust), and extravasation
of red blood cells.? In CAU, there are edema of
the dermis or subcutaneous tissue, mild dilatation
of venules but no evidence of vascular damage.
There is mild into moderate peri-vascular infiltrate
and it consists of monocytes and lymphocytes.
There are also accumulation and degranulation
of eosinophils and neutrophils (Figure 6).7°3!*?
The histological appearance of the skin in CIU
resembles that a late phase reaction, although the
infiltrate in patients with CAU is characterized
by more prominent granulocytes infiltrate than
that of non-autoimmune patients, the frequency
of other infiltrating cells is similar in both
groups, although there is a slight increase in
serum tryptase and cytokines in CAU patients.
This small differences are too insignificant to
be used as a diagnostic tool.** The differential

170

Acta Med Indones-Indones J Intern Med

diagnosis of CAU includes dermatological
conditions with an urticarial component, such
as cutaneous mastocytosis, urticarial vasculitis,
popular urticaria, and urticarial phase of bullous
pemphigoid.*

 

Figure 6. Histopathology of late phase in urticaria. Noted:
There are infiltrations of polymorphonuclear and eosinophils
without any vasculitic appearance.”

THERAPY

Aclear explaination that CAU is not allergic
is important to address since inevitable conviction
many patients hold that diet is a cause. Important
information to patients must include useful
websites and written information about the
disease. Treatment plan should include treatment
of identifiable cause, avoidance of aggravating
factors, advice and written information about
the condition, and antihistamines trial. Topical
lotions in form of calamine lotion, menthol with
aqueous cream, and crotamiton lotion are useful
soothing agents in the treatment.

In chronic urticaria, H1 antihistamines
are the cornerstone of symptomatic treatment.
There is evidence for their beneficial effects,
particularly for the relief of itching, but also
for reducing the number, size, and duration of
urticarial lession. Relief of the wheals and flares
might be incomplete because the vascular effects
of histamine are mediated through its action at
H2-receptors and also mediated by vasoactive
substances including proteases, eicosanoids
such as leukotrienes and prostaglandine, and
neuropeptides. For optimal effectiveness in
CAU, H1-antihistamines should be given on a
regular basis rather than as needed.** The H2
antihistamine receptor also gives beneficial
effects in the treatment of CAU. Several studies
showed that the combination of H1 and H2
antihistamines were effective in the treatment
Vol 44 « Number 2 « April 2012

of CAU, although the results were not quite
satisfying but may help to solve dyspepsia that
frequently related to severe urticaria. The mast
cells membrane stabilizer such as nifedipine may
give beneficial effect in CAU, especially in those
with hypertension.**°°*4

The first line therapy of CAU is H1
antihistamine. The efficacy of the antihistamines
in application to urticaria is attributed to their
H1 activity upon the afferent C nerve fibres of
the skin which reduces itching, upon the axonic
reflexes of the skin which reduces erythema,
upon the endothelium of the postcapillary venules
which reduces extravasation and therefore
wheal formation.* Most antihistamines appear
to possess antiinflammatory actions, including
the reduction of pre- and neoformed mediators,
reductions in cytokine, chemokine, and adhesion
molecule expression, through stabilization of
the mast cells and basophils membranes and
inhibition of the transmembrane flux of calcium
and intracelular cAMP, and also inhibition of
cytoplasmic transcription factors such as nuclear
factor kappa-B (NF-«B) which activates with
H1 receptors activation and migrates towards
the nucleus where it interacts with nuclear
DNA stimulating the transcription of cytokines,
chemokines, adhesion molecules, and the
generation of nitric oxide (NO) (Figure 6).**°°

There are 3 generations on antihistamines,
the first generation antihistamines’ potential is
limited by the sedation caused by their effects
on histamine receptors in the brain. The second
generation antihistamines give no effect on central
nervous system because they block peripheral H1
receptors without penetrating the blood-brain
barrier, but may bring cardiac toxicity (cardiac
arrhytmias). The third generation antihistamines
are the safer version of an equivalent drugs (Table
1).*° A few skin reactions to H1 antihistamines
have been described in the literature, usually
demonstratd by oral provocation tests. Some
mechanisms have been suggested, including
a type I IgE mediated reaction (because a
suggestive clinical history and of positive
intradermal test to diphenhydramine and
cetirizine), photosensitivity with phenothiazines
and terfenadine, and paradoxical nonspecific
histamine release.*°

The second line therapies of CAU are
including doxepin, leukotriene receptor
antagonist, corticosteroid, and several kinds of

Chronic Autoimmune Urticaria

drugs used to reduce the dose and frequency of
corticosteroid use, such as dapsone, chloroquine
and hydroxychloroquine, and sulfasalazine.**“!
Doxepin is a tricyclic antidepressant, with
the dose of 10-25 mg and may be increased
to 50 mg taken at night, shows its superiority
over diphenhydramine, but it has side effects
such as drowsiness, dry mouth, metallic taste,
constipation, urinary retention, blurred vision,
palpitation, and tachycardia. Prednisone is a
corticosteroid drug which is commonly used for
long term disease suppression, with the dose of 60
mg daily as pulse dosing for 3-5 days. It is wise
to do skin biopsy before using corticosteroids,
to differentiate it from angioedema.****
Zafirlukast (10 mg daily taken at bedtime) and
montelukast (20 mg twice daily) are leukotriene
receptor antagonists, used in combination
with H1 antihistamines.*“? Dapsone inhibits
neutrophil adhesion, chemotaxis, lipoxygenase
activity, and the cells’ ability to generate
reactive oxygen species (ROS). Chloroquine
and hydroxychloroquine are thought to have
immunosuppresive effects by inhibition of MHC
class II antigen presentation and production of
inflammatory cytokines such as tumour necrosis
factor- alpha (TNF-a), interleukin-1 beta (IL-1),
and IFN-y, raising the pH of phagolysosome
and may induce basophilic differentiation of
HL-60 cells by increasing the intracelular pH. In

Table 1. Dosages of representative H1-receptor
antagonists™=tee tom 37-39

 

 

Generation Drugs Dose
First Chlorpheniramine 4 mg 3-4x/day or 12
mg sustained release
formulation 2x/day
Diphenhydramine 25-50 mg 3-4x/day or
at bedtime
Hydroxyzine 25-50 mg 3x/day or at
bedtime
Second Doxepin 25-50 mg 3x/day or at
bedtime
Cetirizine 5-10 mg daily
Loratadine 10 mg daily
Acrivastine 8 mg 3x/day
Ebastine 10-20 mg daily
Third Mizolastine 10 mg daily
Levoxetirizine 5 mg daily

Fexofenadine 60 mg 2x/day or 120

or 180 mg daily

Desloratadine 5 mg daily

 

171
Wardhana

neutrophils and monocytes hydroxychloroquine
reduced superoxide production and release, and
significant decrease on neutrophil lysosomal
enzyme activity, raising such effects extend to
other leukocytes.”

The third line treatments include:
methotrexate, cyclosporine, sufasalazine,
mycophenolate mofetil, omalizumab, autologous
serum therapy, intravenous immunoglobulin,
and plasmapheresis.** Methotrexate is a derivate
of folic acid that interferes with dihydrofolate
reductase and the production of DNA in actively
dividing cells. A study found that methotrexate
is effective in patients with CAU in a dose of 2.5
mg orally twice a day on Saturday and Sunday
of every week. Cyclosporine, in doses vary from
3-5 mg/kg as a starting dose and reduced over 3
or 4 months, is a powerful inhibitor of both cell
mediated and humoral responses, inhibits the
release of histamin from basophils and TNF-a
production by mast cells.33 Sulfasalazine,
in a dose varies from 2-6 g/day, will produce
metabolite as 5-aminosalicylic acid causing
reduction of IgE-induced release of histamine in
human basophils and mast cells.** Omalizumab is
a recombinant humanized antibody against IgE,
acts as a neutralizing antibody by binding IgE
at the same site as the high-affinity receptor, as
the result IgE is prevented from sensitizing cells
bearing high-affinity receptors.** Autologous
serum therapy (AST) may prevent relapse of
symptoms for durations as long as 2 years.
Intravenous immunoglobulin, in a dose of 0.4 g/
kg for 5 days, may act as anti-idiotypic antibodies
capable of suppressing IgE autoantibodies.33
Mycophenolate mofetil may be used in patients
who do not respond to antihistamines and or
corticosteroid, and require aggressive therapy to
control the disease symptoms. Plasmapheresis
is useful in eliminating the functional
autoantibodies.*** The autologous serum therapy
is another method of therapy in CAU. The
patients’ serum was separated by centrifuging
5 ml of blood at 2,000 rpm for 10 minutes to
separate the serum. Thereafter, every week for
nine consecutive weeks, the 2 ml of serum was
deep intramuscular injected in alternate buttock
or upper arms (autologous serum injection/ASI).
Almost 60% of the patients with positive ASST
show a significant improvement in their signs
and symptoms. If the symptoms are back again or
relapses, the booster ASI may be given to which

172

Acta Med Indones-Indones J Intern Med

they have responded again. With this method,
the patients may get complete asymptomatic for
more than 2 years.*°

PROGNOSIS

Half of the patients with urticaria alone are
free from lesions in | year, but 20% have lesions
for more than 20 years. Prognosis is good in
most syndromes.” Although angioedema has a
different mechanism, in about 50% of the patients
with CAU may also have angioedema at the same
time, and it has a worse prognosis since there is
a possibility that the recurrent episodes of the
disease will last until 5 years.’°6

CONCLUSION

Chronic autoimmune urticaria is in patients
who may present with transient eruption of
itchy, eruthematous, edematous swellings of the
dermis, which lasts more than six weeks. They
have circulating IgG directed against a-subunit
of the high affinity IgE receptor or anti-FceRla
and the less frequent is IgG anti-IgE antibodies.
Detailed history is of utmost importance,
especially related to the duration of complaint,
and should differentiate between type of lesions.
The gold standard for detecting clinically relevant
to autoantibodies to FceRI is the functional
in vitro donor basophil HRA. There are many
choices of therapies of CAU, but antihistamines
are the first line therapy. Prognosis is good in
most syndromes.

REFERENCES

1. Bernstein JA. Chronic urticaria: an evolving story.
IMAJ. 2005;7:774-7.

2. Boezova E, Grattan CEH. Urticaria, angioedema,
and anaphylaxis. In: Rich RR, Fleisher TA, Shearer
WT,Schroeder Jr HW, Frew AJ, Weyand CM, eds.
Clinical immunology principles and practice. 3rd ed.
Philadelphia: Mosby Elsevier; 2008.p.641-56.

3. Docrat ME. Urticaria-a review and new therapeutic
options. Current Allergy & Clinical Immunology.
2006;19(3):145-50.

4. Riboldi P, Asero R, Tedeschi A, Gerosa M, Meroni PL.
Chronic urticaria: new immunologic aspects. IMAJ.
2002;4(supll):872-3.

5. Abbas AK, Litchman AH. Immunological tolerance
and autoimmunity self-nonself discrimination in the
immune system and its failure. In: Basic immunology
functions and disorders of the immune system. 3rd ed.
Philadelphia:Saunders Elsevier; 2009.p.173-87.

6. Ying S, Kikuchi Y, Meng q, Kay B, Kaplan AP. TH1/
TH2 cytokines and inflammatory cells in skin biopsy
specimens from patients with chronic idiopathic
Vol 44 « Number 2 « April 2012

20.

21.

22.

23).

urticaria: comparison with the allergen-induced latephase cutaneous reaction. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2002;4:694-700.

Reiner SL. Peripheral T lymphocyte responses and
function. In: Paul WE, eds. Fundamental immunology.
6th ed. Philadelphia: Wolter Kluwer Lippincott
Williams & wilkins;2008.p.407-25.

Abbas AK, Litchman AH. Cell-mediated immune
responses. In: Basic immunology functions and disorders
of the immune system. 3rd ed. Philadelphia:Saunders
Elsevier; 2009.p.89-111.

Cohen RC, Aharoni D, Goldberg A, Curevitch I, et al.
Evidence for aberrant regulation of the p21 Ras pathway
in PBMCs of patients with chronic idiopathic urticaria.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2001;109(2):349-56.

Gupta S, Weiss A, Wang S, Nel A. The T-cel antigen
receptor utilizes Lck, Raf-1, and MEK-1 for activating
mitogen-activated protein kinase. J Biol Chem.
1994;269(25):17349-57.

. Salojin K, Zhang J, Cameron M, et al. Impared plasma

membrane targeting of Grb2-murine son of sevenless
(mSOS) complex and differential activation of the
Fyn-T cell receptor (TCR)-¢-Cbl pathway mediated
T cell hyporesponsiveness in autoimmune nonobese
diabetic mice. J Exp Med. 1997;186(6):887-97.
Kumar G, Wang S, Gupta S, Nel A. The membrane
immunoglobulin receptor utilizes a Shc/Grb2/hSOS
complex for activation of the mitogen-activated
protein kinase cascade in a B-cell line. Biochem J.
1995;307:215-23.

. Kaplan AP. Chronic urticaria: pathogenesis and

treatment. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2002;114(3):465-74.
Kikuchi Y, Kaplan AP. Mechanisms of autoimmune
activation of basophils in chronic urticaria. J Allergy
Clin Immunol. 2001;107(6):1056-62.

. Soundararajan S, Kikuchi Y, Joseph K, Kaplan AP.

Functional assessment of pathogenic IgG subclasses in
chronic autoimmune urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2005;15(4):815-21.

Ferrer M, Nakazawa K, Kaplan AP. Complement
dependence of histamine release in chronic urticaria.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1999;104(1):169-72.
Kikuchi Y, Kaplan AP. A role for CSa in augmenting IgG
dependent histamine release from basophils in chronic
urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2002;109(1):114-8.
Yanowsky KM, Dreskin SC, Efaw B, et al. Chronic
urticaria sera increase basophil CD203c expression. J
Allergy Clin Immunol. 2006;117(6):1430-4.

Cebeci F, Tanrikut A, Topcu E, et al. Association
between chronic urticaria anf thyroid autoimmunity.
EJD. 2006;16(4):402-5.

Bansal AS, Hayman GR. Graves disease associated
with chronic idiopathic urticaria:2 case reports. J
Investig allergol Clin Immunol. 2009;19(1):54-6.
Haussmann J, Sekar A. Chronic urticaria. Can J
Gastroenterol.2006;20(4):291-3.

Wedi B, Raap U, Wieczorek D, Kaap A. Urticaria and
infections. Allergy, asthma & Clinical Immunology.
2009;5:10.

Sianturi GN, Soebaryo RW, Zubier F, Syam AF.
Helicobacter pylori infection: prevalence in chronic
urticaria patients and incidence of autoimmune urticaria
(study in dr.Cipto Mangunkusumo, jakarta). Indones J
Intern Med. 2007;39(4):157-62.

 

 

24.

25.

26.

2H;

28.

29,

30.

31.

32:

33)

34.

35,

36.

37;

38.

39.

40.

4l.

42.

Chronic Autoimmune Urticaria

Greaves M. Chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2000; 105(4):664-72.

WolffK, Johnson RA. The skin in immune, autoimmune,
and rheumatic disorders. In: Fitzpatrick’s color atlas &
synopsis of clinical dermatology. 6th ed. New York:
McGraw Hill; 2009.p.358-65.

Baskoro A, Soegiarto G, Effendi C, Konthen PG.
Urtikaria dan angioedema. In: Sudoyo AE, Setiyohadi
B, Alwil, et al. eds. Buku ajar ilmu penyakit dalam. 4th
ed. Jakarta: Pusat Penerbitan Departemen IImu Penyakit
Dalam FKUI;2007.p.257-62.

Toubi E, Kessel A, Avshovich N, et al. Clinical and
laboratory parameters in predicting chronic urticaria
duration: a prospective study of 139 patients. Allergy.
2004;59:869-73.

Goh CJ, Tan KT. Chronic autoimmune urticaria: where
we stand? Indian J Dermatol. 2009;54(3):269-74.
Vonakis BM, Saini SS. New concepts in chronic
urticaria. Curr Opin Immunol. 2008;20(6):709-16.
Tong LJ, Balakrishnan G, Kochan JP, et al. Assessment
of autoimmunity in patients with chronic urticaria. J
Allergy Clin Immunol. 1997;99(4):461-65.

Ying S, Kikuchi Y, Meng Q, et al. TH1/TH2 cytokines
and inflammatory cells in skin biopsy specimens from
patients with chronic idiopathic urticaria: comparison
with the allergen-induced late-phase cutaneous reaction.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2002;109(4):694-700.

Sabroe RA, Poon E, Orchard GE, et al. Cutaneous
inflammatory cell infiltrate in chronic idiopathic
urticaria: comparison of patients with and without
FceRI or anti-IgE autoantibodies. J Allergy Clin
Immunol. 1999;103(3):484-93.

Godse KV. Chronic urticaria and treatment options.
Indian J Dermatol. 2009;54(4):310-2.

Simons FER. H1-antihistamines:more relevant than
ever in the treatment of allergic disorders. J Allergy
Clin Immunol. 2003;112(4):S42-S52.

Simons FER, Siver NA, Gu X, et al. Clinical
pharmacology of H1-antihistamines in the skin. J
Allergy Clin Immunol. 2002;110(5):777-83.

Jauregui I, Ferrer M, Montoro J, et al. Antihistamines
in the treatment of chronic urticaria. J Investig Allergol
Clin Immunol. 2007;17(suppl 2):41-52.

Handley DA, Magnetti A, Higgins AJ. Therapeutic
advantages of third generation antihistamines. Expert
Opin Investig Drugs. 1998;7(7):1045-54.

Simons FER, Advances in H1-antihistamines. N Engl
J Med. 2004;351(21):2203-17.

Bernstein JA. Antihistamines. In: Grammer LC,
Greenberger PA, eds. Patterson’s allergic diseases.
7th ed. Philadelpia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2009.p.561-574.

Demoly P, Messaad D, Benahmed §S, et al.
Hypersensitivity to Hl-antihistamines. Allergy.
2000;55:679-80.

Wedi B, Novacovic V, Koerner M, Kapp A. Chronic
urticaria serum induces histamine release, leukotriene
production, and basophil CD63 surface expressionsinhibitory effects of anti-inflammatory drugs. J Allergy
Clin Immunol. 2000;105(3):552-60.

Bagenstose SE, Levin L, Bernstein JA. The addition
of zafirlukast to cetirizine improves the treatment of
chronic urticaria in patients with positive autologous
serum skin test results. J Allergy Clin Immunol.

 

173
War

43.

44.

45.

46.

174

dhana

2004;113(1):134-40.

McGirt LY, Vasagar K, Gober LM, et al. Successful
treatment of recalcitrant chronic idiopathic urticaria
with sulfasalazine. Arch Dermatol. 2006;142:1337-42.
Horn MP, Pachlopnik JM, Vogel M, et al. Conditional
autoimmunity mediated by human natural anti- FeeRla
autoantibodies? FASEB.2001;15:2268-74.

Muller BA. Urticaria and angioedema: a practical
approach. Am Fam Physician. 2004;69:1123-8.

Bajaj AK, Saraswat A, Upadhyay A, et al. Autologous
serum therapy in chronic urticaria: old wine in a new
bottle. Indian J Dermatol. 2008;74(2): 109-13.

Acta Med Indones-Indones J Intern Med
