 

Autoantibodies to the high-affinity IgE receptor

in children with chronic urticaria

George Du Toit, FCP*+; Ruth Prescott, BSc; Patricia Lawrence, FFDerm*; Asmah Johar, MD§;
Geraldine Brown, RN*; Eugene G. Weinberg, FCP*; Cassim Motala, FCP*; and
Paul C. Potter, MD, FCP+

 

Background: Chronic urticaria (CU) in childhood remains a challenge for investigation, and its etiology is largely unknown.
Autoantibodies to the high-affinity IgE receptor (FceRI) are believed to play a role in the pathogenesis of this disease in adults.

Objective: To determine the prevalence of autoantibodies to FeeRIa on basophils in children with CU vs atopic eczema
dermatitis syndrome (AEDS).

Methods: Eighty children with CU were compared with 38 children with AEDS. In addition to complete blood cell counts
and total IgE measurements, CAP-RASTs to egg, codfish, soy, milk, and peanut were performed. Stool samples were examined
for parasites, and autologous serum skin testing and a functional anti-FceRla assay were conducted to detect autoantibodies.

Results: No significant differences were observed between children with CU and controls in mean basophil or eosinophil
counts. Twenty (26%) of 77 children with CU and 31 (82%) of 38 with AEDS had positive CAP-RAST results (P < .001). Only
2.5% of the children with CU and 0% with AEDS had stool samples positive for parasites (P = .005). Anti-FceRla
autoantibodies were positive in 37 (47%) of 78 children with CU and in none of 33 with AEDS. Non-IgG histamine-releasing
factors were found in 10 (13%) of 78 children with CU.

Conclusions: Children have a similar prevalence of autoantibodies to the FceRIa as has been previously published for adults.
Few have type I allergies, and parasite infestation is also uncommon. Further studies are required to investigate the predictive
value of the autoantibodies in these children with respect to clinical profile, requirements for medications other than antihista
mines, and remission rates.

INTRODUCTION

Chronic urticaria (CU) in childhood remains a challenge in
terms of its etiology, investigation, and management. Adult
CU studies! have demonstrated the presence of circulating
functional autoantibodies directed against either the highaffinity IgE receptor (FceRla@) or IgE in 35% to 60% of
patients. Recently, FceRla@ autoantibodies were found to
occur in as many as 30% of the children with CU in a
northern hemisphere study.’ There is evidence to suggest that
the findings of FeeR1q@ autoantibodies in children may affect
the need for subsequent investigations (eg, concomitant autoimmunity, celiac disease, and Helicobactor pylori infection),”* the medication choice for patients who are poorly
responsive to high-dose antihistamines, disease severity,° and
prognosis.’ However, the demonstration of FeeR1a autoan
* Allergy and Dermatology Clinic, Red Cross Children’s Hospital, School of
Child and Adolescent Health, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South
Africa.

+ Department of Paediatric Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Imperial College at St Mary’s Hospital, London, England.

+ Allergy Diagnostic and Clinical Research Unit, University of Cape Town
Lung Institute, Cape Town, South Africa.

§ Department of Dermatology, Kuala Lumpur University, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia.

This study was supported by a research award from the Allergy Society of
South Africa~GlaxoSmithKline Research 2001.

Received for publication April 29, 2005.

Accepted for publication in revised form August 22, 2005.

Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2006;96:341-344.

tibodies is laborious and expensive, and availability is limited
to research centers. The autologous serum skin test (ASST)
has been extensively investigated as a surrogate marker for
the presence of autoantibodies, although the data are largely
confined to adult studies.'° Recent studies”!!""* have investigated its role in children with CU. There is conflicting evidence to support a role for viral, bacterial, and parasitic
infection or food allergy in CU.'*'© The effects of these
possible triggers on autoimmune-mediated CU are also unclear.

We investigated 80 children referred to the Allergy and
Dermatology Clinic of the Red Cross Children’s Hospital,
Cape Town, South Africa, for evaluation of CU. The primary
aim of the study was to investigate the frequency of functional autoantibodies, specific IgE to Ascaris lumbricoides,
and sensitization to food allergens in these children. Secondary aims were to observe the natural history of the condition
and medications required for symptomatic control.

 

METHODS

Participants

Chronic urticaria is defined as a condition in which wheals,
with or without angioedema, occur continuously or on a
frequently recurrent basis for more than 6 weeks.>”'? Eighty
children referred to the Red Cross Children’s Hospital during
a 2-year period for the evaluation of urticaria met these
criteria. Two age-matched control groups were enrolled: 38

VOLUME 96, FEBRUARY, 2006

341
children with atopic eczema dermatitis syndrome (AEDS),
who served as controls for specific IgE and autoimmune
assays, and 50 healthy children awaiting elective eye surgery.
A healthy laboratory control was used for the basophil release
assays.

Children with urticaria required maintenance therapy and
were given a weight-appropriate dose of cetirizine hydrochloride. Higher doses of cetirizine were given to children who
had ongoing symptoms while using the weight-appropriate
dose. The mean dose required during severe exacerbations
was 0.38 mg/kg daily (range, 0.17-1.2 mg/kg daily). Informed parental consent and assent were obtained for all the
participants. The University of Cape Town ethics and research committee approved the study.

Procedures

In addition to a clinical history and a physical examination,
the following investigations were performed: complete blood
cell count with manual differential cell count, erythrocyte
sedimentation rate (ESR), total IgE, and CAP-RAST Fx5-6
food panel screen (Pharmacia, Uppsala, Sweden). Positive
Fx5 test results were further evaluated for the presence of
specific IgE to hen egg whites, codfish, soy, wheat, cow’s
milk, and peanuts. Stool microscopy, A lumbricoides specific
IgE measurements, and serum eosinophil counts were performed to screen for intestinal parasitism. A standardized
scratch test and an ice cube test were performed to detect the
presence of dermatographism and cold-induced urticaria, respectively.!”

The ASST

The ASST was conducted on children who had not been
taking antihistamines for at least 7 days. The size of the wheal
and flare was compared using a positive histamine control
skin prick test. The ASST was performed using the technique
described by Sabroe et al.!° The dermis of the volar surface of
the arm was injected at 5-cm intervals with 50 wL of autologous serum, histamine (10 mg/mL of histamine in 0.9%
isotonic sodium chloride as positive control), and 0.9% isotonic sodium chloride (negative control). A positive skin test
result was defined as the presence of a serum-induced wheal
with a mean diameter at least 1.5 mm greater than that
induced by 0.9% isotonic sodium chloride.'° All the ASSTs
were performed by a single investigator (G.D.T.). In the
absence of a positive response to histamine, the ASST was
considered uninformative and was repeated after at least 24
hours. The ASST was performed while urticaria was active.

Functional Anti-Fce Receptor Assays

Functional circulating autoantibodies to the IgE receptor were
determined using purified IgG-mediated histamine release
from basophils of nonatopic donors. Patient IgG was extracted from an aliquot of serum, following caprylic acid
treatment in the presence of acetate buffer; dialyzed in phosphate-buffered saline solution by ammonium sulfate precipitation at 50% concentration; reconstituted to the original
volume; and dialyzed extensively with phosphate-buffered

saline solution. One nonallergenic adult, whose basophils
were screened with anti-IgE for greater than 25% release, was
used for the assay. Basophils in freshly collected whole blood
samples were incubated with patient IgG diluted 50% in
piperazine-1,4-bis(2-ethanesulphonic acid) (Sigma, St Louis,
MO) containing 0.03 g/L human serum albumin and 2 ng/mL
of recombinant interleukin 3 (PharMingen, Becton Dickinson, San Diego, CA) for 60 minutes at 37°C. The resulting
histamine release was measured using a radioimmunoassay
(immuno-Biological Laboratories, Hamburg, Germany, and
later Biosource, Nivelles, Belgium). A sample of IgG from a
nonatopic individual was used in the histamine-release assay
as a negative control. Spontaneous histamine release was
measured and subtracted to determine specific release. Patient IgG-stimulated histamine release was defined as a percentage of the total cellular histamine content, and it was
considered positive if it was at least 16.5%. Dilutions of
serum were also studied in the basophil-release assay for the
detection of histamine-releasing factors. The diagnosis of
autoimmune urticaria was confirmed only if the histamine
release—urticaria test result was positive. Spontaneous release
in all experiments is less than 10%. The test result is considered positive only at a release of 16.5% or greater of the total
cellular histamine content. This cutoff value was used for
IgG- and serum factor-induced histamine release.

Statistical Analysis

The statistical evaluation was performed using a software
program (SPSS; SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL). x? Tests were used
to compare the study and control groups.

RESULTS

Of 80 enrolled children (43 males and 37 females; mean age,
7.6 years; median age, 8.3 years; age range, 1.25-19 years),
32 (40%) reported rhinitis, 4 (5%) persistent asthma, and 6
(8%) AEDS. Disease remission occurred in 30 (36%) of 84 of
the children during the 3-year study. The hematology results
in 73 patients with CU were compared with those in 50
age-matched controls (mean age, 86.4 and 77.8 months, respectively). No significant differences were observed between the 2 groups with respect to mean basophil or eosinophil counts. The mean ESR was 11.87 mm/h (range, 1-60
mm/h), and 18 (30%) of the 61 patients had an increased ESR
(>12 mm/h).

The Fx5e CAP-RAST result was positive in 20 (26%) of
77 children with CU compared with 31 (82%) of 38 children
with AEDS (P < .001). In children with CU who had a
positive Fx5 result, positive specific IgEs were found for
peanuts in 4 (20%), hen eggs in 7 (35%), wheat in 7 (35%),
milk in 5 (25%), codfish in 2 (10%), and soy in 4 (20%).
None of the children with CU had specific IgE values that
exceeded previously established 95% positive predictive values.'8 In contrast, most of the children with moderate-tosevere AEDS had positive specific IgE results, some of which
exceeded the 95% positive predictive range.

342

ANNALS OF ALLERGY, ASTHMA & IMMUNOLOGY
Dietary elimination of foods suspected of triggering events
based on history or as a result of IgE test results was supervised by a dietician. The foods that were eliminated were
highly processed, energy dense, and colored, based on parental suspicion of the food as a trigger. Dietician-supervised
elimination diets of all candidate food allergens (as suspected
by history or specific IgE results) did not result in any
participants reducing or eliminating their requirement for
ongoing antihistamine medication.

Results of stool microscopic examinations were positive
for A lumbricoides in | (3%) of 39 children with CU and in
none of 36 children with AEDS (P < .005). Twenty-one
(29%) of 72 children with CU and 25 (66%) of 38 children
with AEDS had specific IgE to A lumbricoides greater than
0.35 kU/L. Total eosinophil counts in the 2 groups were
similar.

The results of the FceRIa@ autoantibodies performed in 78
children are given in Table 1. In 2 patients, the serum samples
obtained were insufficient for analysis. Thirty-seven (47%) of
78 children had positive autoantibody test results where histamine release from their basophils was at least 16.5% (range,
16.5%—60.0%). Mean histamine release in the positive group
was 28.3%. In another 11 patients (14%), borderline histamine release (9.0%-16.4% of total basophil histamine) was
induced by their IgG fractions. The basophils were also
incubated with the patients’ IgG-depleted serum where possible, and in 10 patients (13%), other factors released histamine (>16.5%). Only 1 of the 33 IgG samples from the
children with AEDS had histamine-releasing activity, and it
was below 16.5% of total histamine.

The ASST result was positive in 18 (41%) of the first 44
participants investigated (9 males and 9 females). The ASST
was then discontinued owing to discomfort experienced by
the children because topical anesthetic creams could not be
applied. There was no association between a positive ASST
result and disease remission, which was achieved in 30 (36%)
of 84 children during the 3-year study (P = .51). There was
no correlation between the presence of a positive ASST result
and the presence of FceRla autoantibodies. There was no
correlation between the presence of FceR1la autoantibodies
and positive specific IgE to the food allergens or positive A
lumbricoides IgE. There was an equal distribution of males
and females with positive FceRla autoantibodies and positive ASST results.

Table 1. Presence of FceR1a Autoantibodies*

All the children were given a weight-appropriate dose of
cetirizine. Higher doses of cetirizine were introduced for
children with ongoing CU symptoms. The mean highest dose
required during severe exacerbations was 0.38 mg/kg daily
(range, 0.17-1.2 mg/kg daily). Adverse effects of this regimen included sedation (n = 3) and possible hyperactivity
(n = 1). Only 2 children required a short course of oral
prednisone pulses (2 mg/kg) to achieve adequate therapeutic
control.

DISCUSSION

Autoantibodies to the IgE receptor were present in 47% of the
children with CU and were absent in all the children with
AEDS. This finding is similar to that of Brunetti et al’ for
children (40%) and previous adult studies (35%-—60% prevalence of anti-IgE or anti-FceR1q@ autoantibodies).'~° Ten of
the autoantibody-negative patients (13%) demonstrated the
presence of nonspecific histamine-releasing factors.

Brunetti et al’ demonstrated a positive correlation between
a positive ASST result and histamine releasability (sensitivity, 78%; specificity, 85%) in 52 children. For the 44 children
in the present study who underwent the ASST, we could not
establish a significant correlation between the ASST result
and the presence of FceR1a@ autoantibodies or the presence of
histamine-releasing factors (P = .46 by y’ test). The lack of
correlation between the ASST result and the presence of
FceR1a autoantibodies in this study could be related to the
fact that the ASST was performed in only 44 participants.
Given the equivocal significance of the ASST in children
with CU and its poor tolerability in young children, the role
of ASST in the routine investigation of children with CU
needs further study, particularly because the discomfort associated with the test was not acceptable to many of the
children.

In the present study of histamine-releasing factors, our
cohort revealed an equal sex distribution among the 37 children with positive FceRla autoantibodies; this differs from
other pediatric data,’ which demonstrate a male bias, and
from adult data, which demonstrate a female bias.!! The
children with CU revealed lower common food allergen
sensitization rates than the control group with AEDS. Dietician-supervised elimination diets of all candidate food allergens (as suspected by history or specific IgE results) did not
result in any participants reducing or eliminating their re
 

Children with CU Children with AEDS

 

(n = 78) (n = 33)
Positive IgG FceR1a autoantibodies (histamine release, =16.5%) 37 (47) i?)
Borderline IgG FceR1a autoantibodies (histamine release, 9.0%-16.4%) 11 (14) 1 (8)
Negative IgG FceR1 autoantibodies 30 (38) 32 (97)
Non-IgG serum histamine-releasing factors 10 (13) ND

 

Abbreviations: AEDS, atopic eczema dermatitis syndrome; CU, chronic urticaria; FceR1a, high-affinity IgE receptor; ND, not determined.

* Data are given as number (percentage) of participants.

VOLUME 96, FEBRUARY, 2006

343
quirement for ongoing antihistamine medication. Thus, the
routine use of elimination diets is not recommended for
children with CU.

Children residing in the Western Cape, which enjoys a
temperate climate, are commonly infected with intestinal
parasites. We did not establish a causal association between
intestinal parasitemia and CU. However, children with suspected allergic conditions, such as CU and AEDS, routinely
receive antihelminthic treatment before tertiary clinic referral. This may explain the negative stool microscopic results in
all but | patient with CU and in all controls with AEDS. The
positive A lumbricoides specific IgE antibody results (in
participants with AEDS) indicate previous parasitic infection.

A paucity of circulating basophils was not detected in the
CU group compared with the AEDS group as previously
demonstrated in adult CU studies.'? Erythrocyte sedimentation rates were elevated (>12 mm/h) in 18 (30%) of the 61
patients. Given the high incidence of tuberculosis in Cape
Town (589 cases per 100,000 population in 1998),° all the
patients with an increased ESR underwent radiologic and
Mantoux test screening for tuberculosis; none of the results
were positive. In countries in which chronic infectious diseases such as tuberculosis, malaria, and schistosomiasis are
prevalent, an ESR is useful to screen for the presence of
“other” underlying diseases.

The natural history of CU in childhood is not clear. Twenty-five percent of the children with CU in this cohort experienced disease remission during the 3-year study. No clear
predictors of disease remission were established. All the
children with CU who met the strict clinical criteria for the
diagnosis of CU in this study had a disease severity that
required referral to a specialist center. The present study
group (n = 80) and a previous large pediatric CU study group
(n = 93)’ share similar median ages (8.3 and 7.8 years,
respectively) and equivalent male-female ratios (1.1 and 1.2,
respectively). The youngest child in each study was 16 and 9
months old, respectively.

We found no evidence that either a food allergy or intestinal helminthic infestation served as an ongoing stimulus for
CU in children. Follow-up studies are required to determine
whether the presence of FceR1a autoantibodies affects disease severity, medication requirements, and disease remission
rates in children with CU.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Lindi Terblanche for her secretarial assistance and
for preparing the manuscript for publication.

REFERENCES

1. Ferrer M, Kinet JP, Kaplan AP. Comparative studies of functional and binding assays for IgG anti-FceRIa (a-subunit) in
chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1998;101:672-676.

2. Grattan CE, Sabroe RA, Greaves MW. Chronic urticaria. J Am
Acad Dermatol. 2002;46:645-657.

3. Grattan CE. Autoimmune urticaria. Jmmunol Allergy Clin North
Am. 2004;24:163-181.

4, Greaves MW. Chronic idiopathic urticaria. Curr Opin Allergy
Clin Immunol. 2003;3:363-368.

5. Hide M, Francis DM, Grattan CE, Hakimi J, Kochan JP,
Greaves MW. Autoantibodies against the high-affinity IgE receptor as a cause of histamine release in chronic urticaria.
N Engl J Med. 1993;328:1599-1604.

6. Sabroe RA, Seed PT, Francis DM, Barr RM, Black AK,
Greaves MW. Chronic idiopathic urticaria: comparison of the
clinical features of patients with and without anti-FceRI or
anti-IgE autoantibodies. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1999;40:
443-450.

7. Brunetti L, Francavilla R, Miniello VL, et al. High prevalence
of autoimmune urticaria in children with chronic urticaria. J
Allergy Clin Immunol. 2004;114:922-927.

8. Levy Y, Segal N, Weintrob N, Danon YL. Chronic urticaria:
association with thyroid autoimmunity. Arch Dis Child. 2003;
88:517-519.

9. O’Donnell BF, Lawlor F, Simpson J, Morgan M, Greaves MW.
The impact of chronic urticaria on the quality of life. Br J
Dermatol. 1997;136:197-201.

0. Sabroe RA, Grattan CE, Francis DM, Barr RM, Kobza BA,
Greaves MW. The autologous serum skin test: a screening test
for autoantibodies in chronic idiopathic urticaria. Br J Dermatol. 1999;140:446-—452.

1. Asero R. Sex differences in the pathogenesis of chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2003;111:425-426.

2. Greaves MW. Chronic urticaria in childhood. Allergy. 2000;55:
309-320.

3. Kauppinen K, Juntunen K, Lanki H. Urticaria in children:
retrospective evaluation and follow-up. Allergy. 1984;39:
469-472.

4. Sackesen C, Sekerel BE, Orhan F, Kocabas CN, Tuncer A,
Adalioglu G. The etiology of different forms of urticaria in
childhood. Pediatr Dermatol. 2004;21:102-108.

5. Leighton PM, MacSween HM. Strongyloides stercoralis: the
cause of an urticarial-like eruption of 65 years’ duration. Arch
Intern Med. 1990;150:1747-1748.

6. Volonakis M, Katsarou-Katsari A, Stratigos J. Etiologic factors
in childhood chronic urticaria. Ann Allergy. 1992;69:61—65

7. Zuberbier T, Greaves MW, Juhlin L, et al. Definition, classification, and routine diagnosis of urticaria: a consensus report.
J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc. 2001;6:123-127.

8. Sampson HA. Food allergy, part 2: diagnosis and management.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1999;103:981-989.

9. Grattan CE. Basophils in chronic urticaria. J Investig Dermatol
Symp Proc. 2001;6:139-140.

20. Schaaf HS, Donald PR, Shean K. Culture confirmed multidrug
resistant tuberculosis: diagnostic delay, clinical features, and
outcome. Arch Dis Child. 2003;88:1106-1111.

 

 

 

 

Requests for reprints should be addressed to:

Paul C. Potter, MD, FCP.

Allergy Diagnostic and Clinical Research Unit (ADCRU)
PO Box 34560

Groote Schuur, 7937, South Africa

E-mail: ppotter@uctgsh1.uct.ac.za

 

344

ANNALS OF ALLERGY, ASTHMA & IMMUNOLOGY
