| Original article

Activation of coagulation, anti-coagulation, fibrinolysis
and the complement system in patients with urticaria

Huilan Zhu,’ Bihua Liang,’ Runxiang Li,’ Jiayan Li,’ Luyang Lin,’ Shaoyin Ma‘ and Junfeng Wang”

Summary

Background: Recently released studies indicate
that activation of blood coagulation may be
involved in causing urticaria.

Objective: To evaluate whether or _ not
anticoagulation, fibrinolysis and the complement
system are also involved in the pathogenesis of
urticaria.

Methods: Coagulant factors, anticoagulant
factors, fibrinolytic markers and complement
components were analysed in patients with acute
urticaria (AU) and chronic urticaria (CU).

Results: Plasma levels of activated factor VII
(FVIla) were higher in AU patients (P <0.01) but
not significantly different in CU patients (P >0.05),
while levels of the thrombin-antithrombin
complex (TAT) and prothrombin fragment 1+2
(F1+2) were significantly higher in CU patients
(P <0.01). Levels of factor [IX (FIX) and tissue
factor (TF) were lower in CU patients (P <0.01).
Plasma _ levels of tissue factor pathway
inhibitor/activated factor X (TFPI/Xa) were
higher in CU patients (P <0.01) but not
significantly different in AU patients (P >0.05),
whereas levels of thrombomodulin (TM) were
lower in CU patients (P <0.01). Plasma levels of
D-dimer in AU and CU patients and levels of
high molecular weight kininogen (HMWK) in CU
patients were increased significantly (P <0.01),

From 1 Guangzhou Institute of Dermatology, 510095
Guangzhou , China.

2 Department of psychiatry, University Of British
Columbia, Canada.

Corresponding author: Huilan Zhu

E-mail: zhlhuilan@hotmail.com

Submitted date: 13/6/2012
Accepted date: 23/7/2012

43

while levels of tissue-type plasminogen activator
(t-PA) were decreased (P <0.01). Plasma
concentrations of CS5a in CU patients were
superior to those in healthy controls (P <0.01).
Serum levels of C4 also increased (P <0.01).

Conclusion: The activation of coagulation, anticoagulation, fibrinolysis and the complement
system may be involved in the pathogenesis of
urticaria. It also indicates that coagulation
conditions in CU patients can recover after
antihistamine treatment, but do not immediately
return to normal levels’ directly after
administration. (Asian Pac J Allergy Immunol
2012;31:43-50)

Key words: urticaria, coagulation, anticoagulation,
fibrinolysis, complement

Introduction

Urticaria, characterised as a recurrence of
wheals, is a common condition with a significant to
severe negative impact on its host’s quality of life. It
is estimated that 15—20% of the population suffer at
least one episode of urticaria during their lifetime.'
Urticaria can occur acutely or evolve in a chronic
mode* and its treatment often stumps the
dermatologist. In the last few decades, it has been
generally accepted that histamine released from
basophils and mast cells is at the core of the
pathogenesis of urticaria. Previous studies have
demonstrated an autoimmune pathogenesis mediated
by active autoantibodies to the high-affinity IgE
receptor (FceRI) or to IgE,’ which are able to induce
the activation of basophils and mast cells. However,
some aspects of this pathogenic mechanism remain
unclear. Recent studies have found that activation of
the coagulation cascade resulting in thrombin

production is associated with urticaria.*° This
finding has particularly attracted researchers’
attention as an opportunity to further our

understanding of the pathogenesis of urticaria.
Anticoagulant treatment is a new treatment for
urticaria” * and there is little literature about the
relationship of coagulation, anticoagulation and
urticaria, which calls for further investigation. In
Asian Pac J Allergy Immunol 2012;31:43-50

this study, we analyse whether blood coagulation,
anti-coagulation, fibrinolysis and complement are all
involved in urticaria. Firstly, we measured activated
factor VII (FVIla), which is very important in
initiating blood coagulation, to evaluate whether the
tissue factor pathway is active. The tissue factor
pathway inhibitor/activated factor X (TFPI/Xa) was
also measured as a marker of activation of the
extrinsic anti-coagulation system. Secondly, we
measured D-dimer as the marker of fibrin generation
and subsequent fibrinolysis and then measured the
thrombin-antithrombin complex (TAT) and factor
IX (FIX) before and after antihistamine
administration. This was to see whether
antihistamine drugs act in the coagulating condition
in CU patients. Finally, we measured prothrombin
fragments 1+2 (F1+2), tissue factor (TF),
thrombomodulin (TM), high molecular weight
kininogen (HMWK) and tissue-type plasminogen

activator (t-PA) to further investigate the
coagulation, anti-coagulation and__ fibrinolysis
condition in urticaria. Complement system

components such as C5a, C3 and C4 were also
measured.

Methods

Subjects

40 patients (AU, 20, male/female: 10/10, mean
age: 33 years, age range: 12-63years; CU, 20,
male/female: 11/9, mean age: 38 years, age range:
17-69 years) and 20 controls (male/female: 12/8,
mean age: 38 years, age range: 18-63years) were
studied in July-December 2009. 70 CU patients
(patients before treatment, 40, male/female: 20/20,
mean age: 38 years, age range: 17-78years; patients
after treatment, 30, male/female: 14/16, mean age:
42 years, age range: 21-78years) and 30 controls
(male/female, 16/14, mean age, 39 years, age range,
18-60years) were studied from July 2009 to July
2010; 40 CU patients (male/female: 15/25, mean
age: 39 years, age range: 16-58 years) and 30
controls (male/female: 16/14, mean age: 39 years,
age range: 18-60 years) were studied from
September 2010 to December 2010.

Patients were all from the 4th Zhongshan Road
Clinic of Guangzhou Institute of Dermatology and
Venerology (Guangzhou, China). There were no
statistically significant differences in sex and age
among the enrolled groups. AU was diagnosed
based on the sudden appearance of wheals lasting no
longer than six weeks, while CU was diagnosed
based on the appearance of continuous or recurrent

44

wheals for more than 6 weeks. We excluded patients
with lesions that were suspicious for urticarial
vasculitis, patients with focal infection, physical
urticaria, food allergy, or those who were taking
drugs that could exacerbate CU. Patients who took
immunomodulating drugs, anti-haemorrhagic drugs
or anticoagulant drugs within 30 days, or patients
who took antihistamine drugs within 7 days were
also excluded. The scoring system was based on the
assessment of key urticaria symptoms (wheals and
pruritus, wheals assessment: 0 = none; 1 = mild
(<20 wheals/24 h), 2 = moderate (21-50 wheals/24
h), 3 = intense (>50 wheals/24 h or large confluent
areas of wheals); pruritus assessment: 0 = none; | =
mild, 2 = moderate, 3 = intense). Patients documented
24-h self -evaluation scores.’ This study was
ethically approved by a local ethical committee, in
compliance with the Declaration of Helsinki. All
subjects gave their informed consent before
participation.

Instruments and reagents

FVIla , TFPI /Xa , D-dimer and TM examination
reagent boxes were all from American Diagnostica
Inc, while TAT, FIX, TF, HMWK, t-PA were
bought from American Assaypro. F1+2 and C5a
were bought from Siemens and Becton, Dickinson
and Company, respectively. ALISE] QUALITY
SYSTEM Automated ELISA Processor was
produced by SEAC, Italy.

Experimental methods

Serum levels of C3 and C4 were assayed by
nephelometry immediately after samples were taken.
Plasma levels of FVIIa, FIX, TF, F1+2, TAT,
TFPI/Xa, TM, D-dimer, HMWK, t-PA and CSa
using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA). Sodium citrate-anticoagulated plasma
from patients with urticaria and from control
subjects was stored in plastic cones at —80°C until in
vitro assays were performed. Specimen processing
was executed according to the reagent instruction
booklet.

Statistical analysis

The results of normally distributed data were
expressed as mean + standard deviation. ANOVA
followed by post-hoc Dunnett’s T3 was applied to
compare the data among the three study groups and
Kruskal-Wallis H Test was used when variances
were unequal. An independent sample Student’s ttest was applied to compare the data between the
two study groups. The correlations were assessed
with Spearman correlation coefficients. P <0.05 was
taken as significant.

Results

Coagulant factors

Compared with healthy controls, plasma levels of
FVIla were higher in AU patients (P <0.01) but not
significantly different in CU patients (P >0.05).
Plasma levels of TAT and F1+2 were significantly
higher (P <0.01) but those of FIX and TF were
lower in CU patients (P <0.01). Plasma levels of
TAT and FIX in CU patients tended to recover when
the symptoms were controlled by antihistamine
treatment, but reached no statistical difference
(P >0.05) (Figure1, Figure 2 and Figure 3).

Anticoagulant factors

Compared with healthy controls, plasma levels of
TFPI /Xa were higher in CU patients (P <0.01), but
not significantly different in AU patients (P >0.05).
Plasma levels of TM were lower in CU patients than
those in controls (P <0.01) (Figure1, Figure 3).

Fibrinolytic markers

Compared with healthy controls, plasma levels of
D-dimer increased significantly (P <0.01) in AU
and CU patients, and those of HMWK in CU
patients also increased, whereas those of t-PA
decreased (P <0.01) (Figure 1, Figure 3).

Complement

Plasma concentrations of C5a and serum levels
of C4 in CU patients were superior to those in
healthy controls (P <0.01). Serum levels of C3 were
not significantly different from healthy controls
(P >0.05) (Figure 3, Figure 4).

Correlation analysis

There were correlations between plasma levels of
F1+2, TAT, D-dimer, HMWK, t-PA and symptom
scores in CU patients (7 =0.81, P <0.01; r=0.55, P <0.01;
r=0.73, P <0.01; r=0.-0.39, P <0.05; r =0.35, P <0.05;
respectively). Neither the parameters were
correlated with the course (Table 1).

Discussion

Coagulation and urticaria

F1+2, indicators of the activation of blood
coagulation, are markers of thrombin generation
during blood coagulation — the measurement of
Fl+2 will sensitively reflect the coagulation
condition.” TAT is the complex of thrombin and
antithrombin which is the product of the interaction
between coagulation and anti-coagulation. It is also

45

Further study in the pathogenesis of urticaria

regarded as a marker of coagulation activation and
the generation of thrombin. We found that plasma
levels of F1+2 and TAT in CU patients significantly
exceeded that in healthy controls, paralleling other
studies.**'°!' This also suggested the presence of
coagulation activation and the generation of
thrombin in CU patients and indicated that thrombin
may play an important role in the pathogenesis of
urticaria. Thrombin, a type of serine protease, can
stop bleeding, repair impaired vascellum, rebuild
vascellum and repair tissue by activating protease
activity receptor. Moreover, studies have shown that
thrombin participates in mast cell degranulation by
activating protein kinase receptors on the mast cell
surface.” Solute permeability may result in cutis
and mucosal oedema."

Factor VII, the first factor of the extrinsic
coagulation pathway, forms a complex with the
membrane-bound tissue factor in the presence of
Ca++ that activates primary factor X. Once
thrombin is generated, it acts on fibrinogen, which is
converted into fibrin that is then stabilised by factor
XIIla and finally degraded by plasmin. In this study,
we found that FVIIa plasma levels were higher in
AU patients, but not significantly different in CU
patients; the research of Asero’ found that it was
also elevated. The reason for this may be that the
level of initiator increases once the coagulation
cascade is activated. However, it may decrease
gradually and, as the disease progresses through
different stages, may present at different levels.

FIX, the biggest factor of the vitamin Kdependent protein family, is one of the crucial
coagulation factors in the coagulation cascade. It is
thought that in the traditional clotting mechanism,
FIX mainly participates in either the intrinsic or the
extrinsic activation pathway of coagulation.
However, in this new model of coagulation, FIX
plays roles in both the intrinsic and the extrinsic
activation pathway. In our study, plasma levels of
FIX were significantly lower than those in healthy
controls; this suggests that activation of the
coagulation system and the presence of FIX
consumption occurs in CU patients. In the clinic, we
found vitamin K to be efficient in the treatment of
urticaria in some patients, which may offer some
confirmatory evidence, but this requires further
study.

Tissue factor, also called factor III, is the initiator
in the extrinsic pathway of coagulation. The
complex of TF with factor VIla catalyses the
Asian Pac J Allergy Immunol 2012;31:43-50

700

    
 

Sau
ecu
Ocontrols

 
   

BAL
600 / ecu

Scontrols

 

 

500 fF

400 +

 

 

 

 

(ng/mL) — FPI/X (nM)

300 fF

200 F

100 F

 

FVla (ng/mL) TFPI/X (nM) D-dimer (ng/mL)

Figure 1. Results of plasma levels of FVIla,TFPI/Xa and D-dimer in AU and CU patients. * Contrast to controls,
P<0.01. # AU vs. CU: P <0.01.

 

 

 

 

*
50 = beforeantthistamme
treatment
40 if ofter ntihistemins
treatment
30 —— Oeontrols
20
+
10 # +
‘i a a
TAT (ng/mL) FIX (ng/mL)

Figure 2. Results of plasma levels of TAT and FIX in CU patients. * Contrast to controls: P <0.01. # CU

before treatment vs. CU after treatment: P <0.01.

46
1200

1000

800

600

400

200

Further study in the pathogenesis of urticaria

BCU

Ocontrols

 

TM(ng/mL) t-PA (pmol/L)

 

* *

 

 

F1+2 (pmol/L) TF (pg/mL) HMWK(pmol/L) C5a(pmol/L) TM(ng/mL) +-PA(pmol/L)

Figure 3. Plasma levels of F1+2, TF, HMWK, C5a, TM and t-PA in CU patients and controls. * P <0.01.

0.2

Ecu
Oscontrols

c3 (/L) C4 (g/L)

Figure 4. Results of serum levels of C3 and C4 in CU patients. * P <0.01.

47
Asian Pac J Allergy Immunol 2012;31:43-50

conversion of the inactive protease factor X into the
active protease factor Xa, which then activates the
extrinsic coagulation pathway. Twenty patients with
severe CU were studied in another research. In that
study, skin biopsy specimens, taken from wheals,
were evaluated by immunohistochemical methods
using an anti-TF monoclonal antibody. All
specimens from patients with CU clearly showed
that TF expression was absent in all normal control
specimens. In addition, the double-staining
experiments for TF and eosinophil cationic protein
clearly showed that the TF-positive cells were
eosinophils, suggesting that eosinophils expressing
TF are the cell type triggering the activation of the
TF pathway of coagulation in patients with CU."
Asero and their colleagues also found the activity of
TF in the lesions from CU patients in their study.”
Moreover, Fujii demonstrated that abundant
fibrinogen deposited in the dermis of biopsy
specimens from urticaria and considered that once
the plasma coagulation factors extravasate into the
dermis, the coagulation/fibrinolysis cascade is
instantly activated.'' We found out that lower
concentrations of TF in CU patients may be the
result of plasma TF extravasating into the dermis,
and then activating the coagulation/fibrinolysis
cascade.

Anti-coagulation and urticaria

Tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI) is a
multivalent Kunitz-type protease inhibitor that
primarily inhibits the extrinsic pathway of blood
coagulation. An increased level of TFPI suggests
that the extrinsic pathway of blood anti-coagulation
may be activated. Conversely, TM plays an
important role in preventing thrombosis in vivo as a
component in the intrinsic anti-coagulation system.
The significantly lower concentration also suggests
activation of the intrinsic pathway of blood anticoagulation.

Fibrinolysis and urticaria

D-dimer is a marker of the degradation of crosslinked fibrin, and is also a well-known marker for
the activation of coagulation and fibrinolysis. We
found D-dimer plasma levels to be significantly
elevated in patients with AU and CU, consistent
with the research of others,”'°''!> which suggests
that the coagulation cascade was activated in
urticaria, to the degradation of cross-linked fibrin. In
the research of Kasperska-Zajac,'° they found that
circulating molecules of urokinase-type plasminogen
activator (uPA), urokinase-type plasminogen
activator soluble recepter (suPAR) and plasminogen
activator inhibitor (PAI-1) were not markedly
different in 16 CU patients with positive ASST as
compared to 28 CU patients with negative ASST, as
well as healthy subjects. They concluded that
systemic fibrinolysis might not be involved in
chronic urticaria. However, elevated D-dimer
plasma levels in patients with urticaria suggest
activation of fibrinolysis. A limited number of
patients may be the reason for this, as in our study
we found significantly increased HMWK and
decreased t-PA concentrations in CU patients —
which also suggests the activation of fibrinolysis.

Complement system and urticaria

We found that plasma levels of C5a and serum
levels of C4 increased in CU patients suggesting
activation of the complement system. This
demonstrates a new complement activation pathway
where CS5a generated in the absence of C3 by
thrombin takes the place of C5 convertase in the
classical pathway.'’ Pathogenic IgG cross-links the
IgE receptor directly to cause histamine release, and
activation is augmented by complement. C5a is the
complement agonist that is responsible for the
augmented histamine release.'* For the past 20
years, it has been known that histamine release is
initiated by cross-linking of a subunit of FceRI by

Table 1. Correlation with FVIla, TFPI /Xa, D-dimer, TAT, Fl1+2, HMWK and t-PA in chronic urticaria patients

 

 

Subject FVIla TFPI /Xa D-dimer TAT F1+2 HMWK tPA
score
r -0.094 0.17 0.73 0.55 0.81 -0.39 0.35
E 0.64 0.39 <0.01 <0.01 <0.01 0.01 0.03
course
r 0.15 -0.33 0.03 0.03 0.136 -0.09 0.1
BR 0.46 0.09 0.9 0.89 0.57 0.72 0.65

 
means of IgG antibody, which is the major
immunologic mechanism in chronic urticaria. What
is the relationship between the present finding and
the traditional immunologic mechanism? It has been
proposed that CU is a disease at the crossroads
between autoimmunity and coagulation.'? We have
hypothesised that generation of thrombin,
complement and pathogenic IgG may play
significant roles in the pathogenesis of CU.

Correlation analysis with symptom score and
course

There are correlations between plasma levels of
F1l+2, TAT, D-dimer, HMWK and t-PA and
symptom scores in CU patients in this study.
Combined with other studies,\°'°!**° we consider
that F1+2, TAT, and D-dimer levels are
significantly related to disease severity. They may
be the excellent markers which can reflect the
coagulation/fibrinolysis condition in CU patients,
but whether they can act as the parameters for
evaluation of disease severity and therapeutic effect
still needs further investigation.

Antihistamine drugs and coagulation condition

When the symptoms were under control after
antihistamine treatment, plasma levels of FIX and
TAT tend to recover but they were still lower than
healthy controls. It is possible that the course of
antihistamine treatment is too short in our study to
make the coagulation imbalance recover. We have
discussed the fact that thrombin participates in mast
cell degranulation by activating the protein kinase
receptor on the mast cell surface.'* Solute
permeability may result in cutis and mucosal
oedema !"*!. However, this effect can be blocked by
antihistamine drug administration or mast cell
granule attenuation. In contrast, mast cell
recruitment and activation may result in local
thrombolysis and the prevention of coagulation.”

In conclusion, this study shows that the
activation of coagulation,  anti-coagulation,
fibrinolysis and the complement system may all be
involved in the development and progression of
urticaria. However, not all of the related proteins
maintain similar levels as the disease progresses.
Plasma levels of some coagulant and anticoagulant
factors may change through the different stages of
urticaria. F1+2, D-dimer and TAT may not only be
stable parameters that reflect coagulation and
fibrinolysis, but may also be associated with
symptom scores in urticaria. We consider that
activation of the coagulation cascade results in

49

Further study in the pathogenesis of urticaria

generation of thrombin, subsequently activating
anti-coagulation and fibrinolysis; thrombin and
other proteins, in the course of this activation,
participate in mast cell degranulation and result in
urticaria. Furthermore, coagulation conditions in
patients with CU can recover after antihistamine
treatment but do not completely return to normal
levels immediately after administration. How the
coagulation, anti-coagulation, fibrinolysis and
complement systems act in CU pathogenesis, and
the relationship between the present finding and the
traditional immunologic mechanism still needs
further investigation.

Conflicts of interest
All authors have no conflicts of interest in this
study.

Acknowledgement

The research was supported by the foundation of
GuangZhou Science and Technology Bureau in
2009 (2009Z1-E011).

References

1. Kulthanan K, Jiamton S, Thumpimukvatana N, Pinkaew S. Chronic
idiopathic urticaria: prevalence and clinical course. J Dermatol.
2007;34:294-301.

Hennino A, Berard F, Guillot I, Saad N, Roziéres A, Nicolas JF.
Pathophysiology of urticaria.
2006;30:3-11.

Clin Rev Allergy Immunol.

Zuberbier T, Bindslev-jensen C, Canonica W, Grattan CE, Greaves
MW, Henz BM, et al. EAACI/GA2LEN/EDF guideline: definition,
classification and diagnosis of urticaria. Allergy. 2006;61:316—20.
Asero R, Tedeschi A, Riboldi P, Cugno M. Plasma of patients with
chronic urticaria shows signs of thrombin generation, and its
intradermal injection causes wheal-and-flare reactions much more
frequently than autologous serum. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2006;117:1113-7.

Asero R, Tedeschi A, Coppola R, Griffini S, Paparella P, Riboldi P,
et al. Activation of the tissue factor pathway of blood coagulation in
patients with chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clinical Immunol.
2007;119:705-10.

Parslew R, Pryce D, Ashworth J, Friedmann PS. Warfarin treatment
of chronic idiopathic urticaria and angio-oedema. Clin Exp Allergy.
2000,30:1161-5.

Chua SL, Gibbs S. Chronic urticaria responding to subcutaneous
heparin sodium. Br J Dermatol. 2005;153:216-7.

Asero R, Tedeschi A, Cugno M. Heparin and tranexamic Acid
therapy may be effective in treatment-resistant chronic urticaria
with elevated d-dimer: a pilot study. Int Arch Allergy Immunol.
2010;152:384-9.

Ota S, Wada H, Abe Y, Yamada E, Sakaguchi A, Nishioka J ,et al.
Elevated levels of prothrombin fragment 1+2 indicate high risk of
thrombosis. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost. 2008;14:279 —85.
Asian Pac J Allergy Immunol 2012;31:43-50

10.

ll.

12.

13,

14.

LS,

Asero R, Tedeschi A, Riboldi P, Griffini S, Bonanni E, Cugno M.
Severe chronic urticaria is associated with elevated plasma levels of
D-dimer. Allergy. 2008;63:176-80.

Fujii K, Usuki A, Kan-No Y, Ohgou N. Elevation of circulating
thrombin-antithrombin III complex and fibrin degradation products
in urticaria: a laboratory finding unrelated to intravascular
coagulopathy. J Dermatol. 2008;35:308-10.

Kido H, Fukusen N, Katunuma N, Morita T, Iwanaga S. Tryptase
from rat mast cells converts bovine prothrombin to thrombin.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1985;132:613-9.

Schaeffer RC, Gong F, Bitrick MS, Smith TL. Thrombin and
bradykinin initiate discrete endothelial solute
mechanisms. Am J Physiol. 1993 Jun; 264(6 Pt 2): H1798-809.
Cugno M, Marzano AV, Tedeschi A, Fanoni D, Venegoni L, Asero
R. Expression of Tissue Factor by Eosinophils in Patients with
Chronic Urticaria. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2009;148:170-4.

Kasperska-Zajac A, Brzoza Z. Increased D-dimer concentration in

permeability

plasma of patients with severe acute urticaria. Br J Dermatol.

50

20.

2009; 161:1409-10.

. Kasperska-Zajac A, Brzoza Z, Rogala B. Blood urokinase

plasminogen activator system in chronic urticaria. Arch Dermatol
Res. 2007;298:409-11.

. Huber-Lang M, Sarma JV, Zetoune FS, Rittirsch D, Neff TA,

McGuire SR ,et al. Generation of C5a in the absence of C3: a new

complement activation pathway. Nat Med. 2006;12:682-7.

. Kikuchi Y, Kaplan AP. A role for C5a in augmenting IgG
dependent histamine release from basophils in chronic urticaria. J
Allergy Clin Immunol. 2002;109:114 —8.

. Asero R, Riboldi P, Tedeschi A, Cugno M, Meroni P. Chronic

urticaria: a disease at a crossroad between autoimmunity and
coagulation. Autoimmun Rey. 2007;7:71-6.

Valent P, Baghestanian M, Bankl H C, Sillaber C, Sperr WR, Wojta
J. New aspects in thrombosis research: possible role of mast cells as
antithrombotic cells. Thromb

profibrinolytic and

Haemost.2002;87:786-90.
